ACC 203 Introduction to Accounting I – 3 credit hours. Basic concepts with a focus on how accounting events affect financial
statements. Emphasizes both preparation and use of external financial reports. Topics include accrual versus cash,
receivables, payables, inventory, long-term operational assets, long-term liabilities, stockholder’s equity, recording
procedures, and financial statement analysis. Prerequisites: None.
ACC 204 Introduction to Accounting II – 3 credit hours. Accounting II is a continuation of ACC 203. Basic concepts associated
with managerial accounting. Emphasizes the use of relevant information for planning, control and decision-making.
Topics include cost behavior, cost allocation, product costing, budgeting, responsibility accounting, and capital
budgeting. Prerequisites: ACC 203.
ACC 219 Managerial Accounting – 3 credit hours. A study of the uses of accounting information for planning and control in an
enterprise area of study including budgeting, financial analysis, basic cost accounting reports, and capital budgeting. Not
for accounting majors. Prerequisites: ACC 203, ACC 204.
ACC 301 Intermediate Accounting I – 3 credit hours. A study of financial reporting theory and process. Each major asset category
is analyzed in balance sheet order. Prerequisites: ACC 203, ACC 204.
ACC 302 Intermediate Accounting II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of accounting financial theory through more balance sheet
analysis, and study of special-purpose statements. Prerequisites: ACC 301.
ACC 303 Cost Accounting – 3 credit hours. Cost accounting is an analysis of the principles of cost accounting for various
manufacturing and/or service businesses, especially the use of cost data under job order, process, and standard –cost
systems. Prerequisites: ACC 203, ACC 204.
ACC 306 Intermediate Accounting III – 3 credit hours. To provide students with a “cutting edge” understanding of financial
accounting with respect to the following topics: revenue recognition, income taxes, pensions and post-retirement
benefits, leases, accounting changes and error analysis, cash flow statement, financial statement analysis, interim
reporting, segment reporting, and disclosures. Prerequisites: ACC 301, ACC 302.
ACC 351 Federal Tax Accounting I – 3 credit hours. An analysis of the Federal Income Tax Law as it applies to individuals and a
study of the law applicable to new regulations, cases, and tax issues. Prerequisites: ACC 204.
ACC 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Accounting – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the
form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related
to the student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development
Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The
student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to
receive ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
ACC 401 Independent Study – 3 credit hours. This course entails the completion of a research project to be accomplished under the
supervision of a member of the accounting faculty. The project will involve a detailed study of a topic of particular
interest to the accounting profession. The results of the study will be documented by a research report. Prerequisites:
Senior standing, instructor consent, advisor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 219 ~
ACC 403 Advanced Cost Accounting – 3 credit hours. A study of the application of cost accounting data to managerial planning
and control, emphasizing special purpose cost accounting statement and recent developments in the use of quantitative
tools in management decision-making. Recommended for accounting majors. Prerequisites: ACC 303.
ACC 421 Advanced Accounting – 3 credit hours. A detailed study of the accounting principles and problems related to
partnerships and business combinations. A substantial part of the course is devoted to student's reports on other advanced
accounting topics. Prerequisites: ACC 301. Corequisites: ACC 302.
ACC 441 Auditing I – 3 credit hours. The study of generally accepted auditing standards and procedures underlying the
certification of financial statements by certified public accountants. Through problems and cases, the student is
introduced to the methodology used by an independent auditor in verifying the books and records of a business entity.
Prerequisites: ACC 302.
ACC 450 Accounting for Non-Profit Organizations – 3 credit hours. A study of the systems of fund accounting used by
government units, charitable organizations, and educational institutions. Special emphasis will be placed on the
accountability/stewardship function accomplished by the accounting system of a non-profit organization. Prerequisites:
ACC 301.
ACC 451 Federal Tax Accounting II – 3 credit hours. This course is an analysis of partnership and corporate tax laws and an
introduction to tax research and planning, as a means of gaining an understanding of the role of the tax practitioner.
Prerequisites: ACC 351.
ACC 460 Seminar in Accounting Theory – 3 credit hours. An analysis of the body of generally accepted accounting principles as
interpreted by decisions of the Accounting Principles Board and the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Extensive
use will be made of case studies where outcomes have been influenced by recent pronouncement. Prerequisites: ACC
302.
ACC 461 Seminar in International Aspects of Accounting – 3 credit hours. This course will emphasize an understanding of a
global economy, multinational business activity on accounting. Emphasis will be placed on comparative accounting and
reporting activities, as well as regulatory requirements of various countries. Recommended for accounting majors.
Prerequisites: ACC 204 and Senior standing.
ACC 472 Accounting Information Systems – 3 credit hours. This course covers the subject matter of information systems such as
feasibility study, systems design and implementation. Modern accounting information systems are computer-based;
hence, more emphasis is placed on computer based systems and processes that impact the organization. It creates a
framework for accounting information systems by combining knowledge about business as it relates to information
systems, information technology, and accounting. Prerequisites: ACC 302.
Agribusiness
AGB 102 Introduction to Careers in Agriculture – 1 credit hour. This course provides the agribusiness student and introduction to
careers in the private sector and government agencies. Guest speakers are invited to the class to discuss job requirements,
fringe benefits and employment opportunities. The student is required to prepare a resume and cover letter for each
speaker. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 199 Computers in Agriculture – 3 credit hours. This course is designed for the freshman students, who are planning to major
in the "Agricultural Sciences" at Alabama A&M University. The course provides an introduction to computers, words
processing, PowerPoint presentations, spread-sheets, use of Internet for Educational purposes, and simple statistical
analysis functions and geospatial analysis that are commonly found in general agriculture and natural resources,
agribusiness and marketing, family and consumer sciences, urban planning, and other related careers. Prerequisites:
None.
AGB 211 Metal Fabrication – 3 credit hours. This course will encompass a combination of three content areas: classification and
properties of metals, welding, and machine tool technology. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 211L Basic Metal – 3 credit hours. The overall content for basic metals will place emphasis on classifications and properties of
metals, various welding processes, acetylene welding equipment, arc welders, mig welders, introduction to various types
of measuring devices and machine tool technology.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 220 ~
AGB 212 Wood Technology – 3 credit hours. A study of the safe operations and maintenance of woodworking machines. Methods
of design, construction and finishing of wood products and an overview of the wood industry. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 221 Introduction to Agricultural Economics – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the field of agricultural economics through
the application of principles of economics to problems in agriculture and related industries; analysis of supply and
demand, resource allocation and utilization; the role of natural resources, population and capital in economics
development; policy issues including resource, price and income policies, and international trade. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 299 Quantitative Applications in Agribusiness – 3 credit hours. This course is an introduction to quantitative agricultural
methods, tools and problems solving techniques. The course is designed to expand theoretical math concepts and make
applications in the agribusiness and agricultural sector. Emphasis will be on data manipulation especially as it applies to
graphical analysis of physical and financial functions. The United States Department of Agricultural (USDA) data and
graphical set 'World Agricultural Trends and Indicator (WATI)" and US Census of Agriculture databases will be
utilized. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 300 Agribusiness Statistics – 3 credit hours. An introduction to sources and methods of collection and analysis of prices and
other agricultural statistics. Focus is on the basic tools of statistical analysis, such as ratios, frequency distribution,
averages and dispersion measures, as well as on time series, correlation, and simple and multiple regression analyses.
Prerequisite MTH 112.
AGB 301 Electric Systems and Machines – 3 credit hours. Units of study include: basic circuits elements, electric wiring systems,
motor operation and maintenance, electrical and electronic controls. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 302 Organization and Administration of Career Technology Education – 3 credit hours. A course dealing with identification,
exploration and research of current issues in the Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, including inquiry, reading and
review; problem identification and selection; data collection and analysis; proposing, selecting and testing of possible
solutions; and organization, participation and evaluation. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 311 Small Power Units and Equipment – 3 credit hours. A course dealing with unit selection, principles of operations, and
maintenance of small air-cooled engines. Emphasis will be placed on operation, adjustment, and maintenance of farm
tractors. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 314 Small Structure Construction – 3 credit hours. Planning and construction methods for small buildings made of lumber,
poles, metals, concrete, blocks and plastics; bill of materials; carpentry of layouts, foundations, framing, floors, covering
and finishes. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 322 Farm Management – 3 credit hours. Organization and operation of the farm business analyzed to obtain an income
consistent with family resources applied to the individual farm. Emphasis on budgeting crop and livestock system, farm
record analysis, financial management, farm leases, and risk management. Prerequisites: ECO 232.
AGB 323 Agricultural Marketing – 3 credit hours. Provides a critical analysis of methods employed by agencies engaged in
marketing farm products including services performed, factors affecting prices and marketing channels, marketing
agricultural products through cooperatives, and establishment and operation of cooperatives. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 330 Internship in Agribusiness – 4-6 credit hours. Provision of supervised, on-the-job experiences with extension service,
agribusiness firms, governmental agencies and farm cooperatives for upper level students. These experiences will be
accompanied by regularly scheduled organized discussion periods designed to provide positive evaluation and analysis
of the intern experience. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 333 Commodity Marketing – 3 credit hours. Focus on using futures markets in managing agricultural price risk. Topics
include: hedging, forward contracting and options as risk management tools. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 343 Economics of Grain Marketing – 3 credit hours. A course exposes students to the activities, economic concepts and
principles of grain marketing. The focus is on the movement of major grains grown in the US—corn, wheat, and
soybeans from farm production to final consumption. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 401 Methods of Teaching in Agriscience – 3 credit hours. Consideration will be given to approved methods and techniques
of teaching Agribusiness at the secondary level. Emphasis will be placed on foundations for methods in Agribusiness 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 221 ~
Education, method for teaching and learning, application of learning, teaching special populations and evaluation of
learning. Prerequisites: EDU 307, EDU 402, EDU 403, EDU 411.
AGB 405 Extension Methods – 3 credit hours. Principles and procedures in developing extension programs in agriculture, with
emphasis on program determination, teaching methods and relationship with teaching adults in the life-learning process.
Prerequisites: None.
AGB 418 Agricultural Leadership – 3 credit hours. Development of skills, qualities, and behaviors which enable effective
leadership, study of group and organization function, interpersonal relationships, teaming and leadership in various
organizational settings. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 420 Agricultural Cooperatives – 3 credit hours. This course explores the functioning, management, and role of cooperatives
in agriculture. It is designed to provide students with greater appreciation of the economic and legal underpinning of
institutional arrangements in agriculture and of the potential role such arrangements may play in solving many of the
pressing problems in production and marketing of agricultural products. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 421 Agribusiness Management – 3 credit hours. The management of principles applicable to the agribusiness industry. The
application of economic principles to the decision-making process of firms supplying input to agriculture, or processing
and distribution of agricultural products, demand analysis, budgeting, financing, pricing, inventory control, and
merchandising. Prerequisites: ECO 232.
AGB 422 Agricultural Financing – 3 credit hours. Study of capital and credit needs of farms and agribusiness firms. Sources and
cost of capital and the allocation of capital over time and among alternatives. Risk management strategies and financial
performance analysis are covered. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 423 Food Merchandising – 3 credit hours. This course will expose students to various merchandising activities that affect the
sale of food and nonfood products through the U.S. food marketing system. Special emphasis will be placed on those
merchandising activities that occur in the retail store. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 424 International Agricultural Development – 3 credit hours. Conceptual analysis of economic development with
international focus on the lesser developed areas and countries. Emphasis is placed on financial aid, technical aid and
appropriate factor proportions in the transformation of agrarian economics. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 425 Agricultural Policy – 3 credit hours. The application of economic analysis to Federal and State government programs and
policies affecting resource adjustment in agriculture to determine their effects on products' incomes and consumers'
prices. Past programs are critically appraised in light of existing economics and the political climate at the time of their
implementation; existing programs and alternate proposals are evaluated using such criteria as resource use and income
distribution within agriculture and between agriculture and the rest of the economy, and other economic and social
implications of alternative policies and programs are reviewed. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 430 Agricultural Prices – 3 credit hours. An analysis of the factors affecting the prices of agricultural products and a study of
the behavior of these prices, seasonal and cyclical price movement; government activities relating to agricultural prices,
marketing margins and prices paid, and price predication. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 433 Agricultural Sales – 3 credit hours. Introduction of sales as a career choice within the agricultural science disciplines.
Study of the structure of sales organization as well as activities involved in day-to-day operations. Hands-on training in
performing functions of an agribusiness salesperson is covered. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 443 Economics of Food Distribution – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamentals of
food distribution and logistics. Students are exposed to logistic systems and management in food distribution. These
include inventory, warehousing, traffic, materials and handling, packaging, order processing and customer service.
Special emphasis will be placed on the sale of food and nonfood products through the US food marketing system, and
the merchandising activities occurring in the retail store. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 445 Natural Resource Economics – 3 credit hours. Exposure of students to fundamentals of agricultural and natural resource
economics, with emphasis on the problems and policies of both developed and less developed worlds. Special focus will
be placed on pollution control issues, hazardous wastes, and the vulnerability of minority population and government
responses to increasing visibility of these issues. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 222 ~
AGB 453 International Agricultural Marketing – 3 credit hours. A course designed to expose students to the fundamentals of global
agricultural marketing, the challenges involved, and the political and economic ramifications of marketing abroad.
Prerequisites: None.
AGB 490 Special Problems – 3 credit hours. Guided independent investigation of problems in Agricultural Sciences, Agribusiness
Management and Agricultural Economics. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 495 Internship – 12 credit hours. Practice teaching by students in vocational agriculture for twelve weeks in a selected high
school in Alabama, offering vocational agriculture, under the supervision of the local teacher of vocational agriculture
and the agricultural education teacher trainers of the University. Prerequisites: None.
AGB 499 Research in Agribusiness – 3 credit hours. Critical review of relevant research and group discussion of current
development and problems related to the agricultural sector. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing and consent of
academic advisor. Prerequisites: None.
Apparel, Merchandising & Design
AMD 104L Art and Design – 3 credit hours. A study of the art elements and principles and their application to everyday life.
Prerequisites: None.
AMD 201L Basic Clothing Construction – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Experience in
the development of basic skills in clothing construction. Open to male and female students and other adults with little or
no experience in clothing construction. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 203 Consumer Aspects of Clothing – 3 credit hours. An introduction to clothing and textiles, including wardrobe planning,
maintenance, and coordination; clothing selection criteria; clothing for the world of work; textile classification; and use
and care of textile products. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 204L Clothing Throughout the Lifecycle – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). A study
of the economic, social, and psychological aspects of clothing as they relate to the acquisition, use, and care of clothing
for family members. Domestic and commercial sewing machines are utilized. Prerequisites: AMD 104L, AMD 201L,
AMD 203.
AMD 206L Interior Design – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). The application of the
elements and principles of art to the planning, selection, and arrangement of household furniture and furnishings. A
survey of traditional, contemporary, and modern trends in interior and exterior house planning is provided. Prerequisites:
AMD 104L.
AMD 208 Ready-to-Wear Apparel Analysis – 2 credit hours. An industry approach to the evaluation of quality in ready-to-wear
apparel. Provides an understanding of what constitutes apparel quality, how it is achieved, and the factors that affect cost
and quality. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 302 Historic Costume – 3 credit hours. A comprehensive study of dress throughout periods of history, including the cultural
and economic factors associated with the development, adoption, and abandonment of styles. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 303 Fashion Merchandising I – 3 credit hours. A study of the American and European fashion industries from production of
raw materials to the distribution of finished goods and their impact on the international economy. An understanding of
the language of fashion, fashion designers, and retailers is included. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 304 Cultural Aspects of Clothing – 3 credit hours. A study of clothing as a social, psychological, and economic force,
including the study of cultural patterns, behavioral reactions, changing needs, and technological developments.
Prerequisites: None.
AMD 305 Housing and Interiors – 3 credit hours. A study of housing and living environments with emphasis on construction,
arrangement, use and care of furniture and equipment. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 223 ~
AMD 306 Fashion Merchandising II – 3 credit hours. An examination of basic concepts and practices of retail management and
their relationship to the world of fashion. Activities involved in the merchandising of fashion goods, including analyzing
and forecasting consumer demand and planning promotional strategies are emphasized. Prerequisites: AMD 303.
AMD 308 Visual Merchandising – 3 credit hours. The study of creative techniques in the display of retail merchandise and their
effective application to the enhancement of product salability. Prerequisites: AMD 104L.
AMD 315 Consumer Textiles I – 3 credit hours. A study of fibers, yarns, structures, color, and finishing techniques of textiles and
textile products with emphasis on the selection of fabrics for specific consumer end uses. Prerequisites: None.
AMD 316L Consumer Textiles II – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Advanced study of
textile fibers, fabrics and products utilizing laboratory testing techniques and safety procedures employed in the
evaluation of textiles for specific end uses. Prerequisites: AMD 315.
AMD 403L Flat Pattern Design – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). An in-depth study of
the basic principles of flat pattern manipulations and their applications to apparel design. Prerequisites: AMD 204L.
AMD 404L Advanced Clothing and Design – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). A study of
techniques in methods of fitting, designing, and advanced clothing construction. Designing and construction of garments
for individual figure types and pattern-making through the flat pattern method are emphasized. Prerequisites: AMD
204L, AMD 403L.
AMD 405L Functional Clothing Design – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Development
of apparel from a problem-solving perspective to meet aesthetic and functional needs in regard to exceptional
proportions, rehabilitation, activity, performing arts, and new technology. Prerequisites: AMD 104L, AMD 201L.
AMD 406L Draping – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). The principles and techniques of
draping and dress designing based on the manipulation of fabric on a form. Prerequisites: AMD 104L, AMD 201L,
AMD 403L.
AMD 407 Advanced Interior Design – 3 credit hours.
AMD 410L Apparel CAD – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Hands-on experience in the
application of AutoCAD principles to apparel design, pattern making, and grading. Prerequisites: (AGB 199 or MDT
252) and AMD 403L.
AMD 419 Merchandising and Design Seminar – 2 credit hours. A study and discussion of contemporary social, economic, and
political trends and issues of significance to the textiles and apparel industries, including an examination of future
directions for the profession. Personal and professional entry-level skills and practical experiences are explored, as well.
Prerequisites: None.
AMD 421 Problems and Independent Study – 1-3 credit hours. Special problem selected and solved by the students. Independent
study, research, projects, or special field experience under area supervision and evaluation is required. Prerequisites:
None.
AMD 422 Fashion Study Tour – 1-3 credit hours. A study of the many facets of the fashion industry, including tours of primary and
secondary suppliers, apparel manufacturers, designer showrooms, fashion presses, accessory showrooms, buying offices,
testing laboratories, pattern companies, merchandising centers, museums, mansions, and so forth. Pre- and post-tour
seminars and written assignments are required. Prerequisites: None.
Academic Success Course
ARP 101 Academic Success Course – 1 credit hour. The seminar is designed to assist students with developing the behaviors and
skills necessary to restore their academic standing and achieve academic self-confidence. Students will learn and apply
appropriate study and time management strategies, identify personal barriers to achieving success and develop strategies
to overcome these barriers, initiate a personal development plan, and engage with the appropriate University services, as
needed. This course cannot be applied to any program and is not computed in the GPA. Prerequisites: (GPA under 1.50
(1-24 earned credit hours), GPA under 1.75 (25-44 earned credit hours), GPA under 2.00 (≥ 45 earned credit hours) )
and/or consent of the instructor.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 224 ~
Art
ART 101 Art Appreciation – 3 credit hours. A general survey of the visual arts for non-art majors. Prerequisites: None.
ART 103 Introduction to Computer Systems for Visual Art – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Introduction to hardware and
system interface as well as to foundation software for page layout, vector-based imaging, and bitmap imaging. This is a
foundation course centered on the manipulation of the elements of art and application of design principles through
computer software and media. Students will explore the theories and principles and build on this understanding using
both traditional and contemporary industry standard digital techniques. Required for all visual arts majors. Prerequisites:
Declared art majors and art minors.
ART 110 Drawing I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An introductory course involving drawing from direct observation
with an emphasis on space, volume, linear and free hand perspective, and other basic techniques and concepts. With an
emphasis on line as the principle conveyor of form, ART 110 will expose students to ideas and skills that have occupied
artists throughout history. Prerequisites: None.
ART 111 2D Design – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An introductory course using fundamental elements, principles,
vocabulary and theories of visual art to develop concise concepts of design. Prerequisites: None.
ART 121 3D Design – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A foundations course utilizing the elements and principles of
design to explore form as mass and volume. Through a series of assigned projects using simple materials the student will
investigate the physical and conceptual attributes of three-dimensional form in space. Prerequisites: None.
ART 209 Drawing II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Drawing II continues and expands upon the information and skills
acquired in Drawing I with an emphasis on value as the chief conveyor of form. There will be a greater stress on
composition as a way of heightening aesthetic interest and conveying information and meaning. Primer course for ART
491, ART 492, ART 493, ART 494. Prerequisites: ART 110 or instructor consent.
ART 211 Color Theory – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Color Theory is a foundations course designed to introduce the
student to the principles of color mixing, color interaction and design, and traditional and contemporary theory as relates
to color history and development in both two and three dimensions. While classroom hours will be divided between
lectures, demonstrations, critiques and discussions, this is a studio class with significant time devoted in class to the
practice of seeing and working with color through a series of exercises to put the student in the position of making
informed color decisions. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 111) or instructor consent.
ART 220 History of Art I – 3 credit hours. A survey of the history of art from prehistoric times to the Renaissance. This course
presents a view of ancient, medieval and Renaissance art the world over.
ART 221 History of Art II – 3 credit hours. A survey of the history of art from Renaissance times to present. This course presents a
view of Renaissance through modern art.
ART 230 Graphic Design I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Concentrates on the fundamental concepts of graphic design
and digital media, including imagery, sound, video, animation and web. This course is centered on the manipulation of
the elements of art with the use of the computer. Assignments are given to engage students in the technical, conceptual,
and aesthetic aspects of digital media. Students employ a diverse range of techniques and software as they become
familiar with contemporary artistic processes involving the use of the computer and/or other technologies. Consists of
hands-on experimentation and production supplemented by videos, and academic research. Prerequisites: Art majors, art
minors, or instructor consent.
ART 298 Digital Photography – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Through readings lectures, demonstrations and regular
shooting assignments and critique, introduces the basic concepts of photography as a form of creative expression. With
an emphasis on the student’s own creative practice, covers technical, aesthetic and conceptual aspects of photography
and explores how meaning is created in a photograph. Introduces basic digital editing, camera controls, selection and
sequencing. Assignments cover traditional genres such as landscape, portrait and still life. Places a strong emphasis on
interaction with classmates’ work and receptivity to critique. Fully manual DSLR is required for this course.
Prerequisites: Visual Art majors, Visual Art minors, or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 225 ~
ART 299 Advanced Digital Photography – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Highly technical course consists mainly of
technical applications, readings, quizzes and discussion. Focuses on learning advanced image-editing software such as
Adobe Photoshop, and photo management and manipulation software. Covers montage and color management systems
including profiling for color printing and monitors. Emphasis is on composition and print quality as well as creative
expression. Prerequisites: ART 298 or equivalent.
ART 305 Ceramics I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An investigation of the basic processes, methods, and materials of
working in clay. Our primary emphasis is hands-on studio work, with frequent demonstrations of primarily handbuilding methods and decorating technique. In lectures we will explore historical and contemporary hand-built forms and
decoration as they relate to specific assignments. Assigned projects are designed with considerable flexibility to
encourage personal expression and creativity. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494.
Prerequisites: None.
ART 306 Ceramics II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A continued investigation of the techniques and skills learned in
ART 305, though the primary emphasis is throwing on the pottery wheel and studio work with frequent demonstrations
of primarily throwing methods and decorating techniques. In lectures we will explore historical and contemporary
thrown forms and decoration as they relate to specific assignments. Assigned projects are designed with considerable
flexibility to encourage personal expression and creativity. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART
494. Prerequisites: ART 305 or instructor consent.
ART 307 Jewelry I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A study of the methods, materials and processes of designing
jewelry. The use of personal symbols, creativity, and techniques of metal fabrication by hand and machine tools is
emphasized. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 111) or instructor consent.
ART 308 Jewelry II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A continuation of skills and techniques introduced in ART 307.
Special emphasis is placed on lost-wax casting and exploration and use of innovative materials in jewelry. Primer course
for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites: ART 307 or instructor consent.
ART 309 Figure Drawing – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Figure Drawing explores the “anatomy of drawing.” Primary
focus is on the structure of the human figure through planar development and the understanding of spatial relationships.
Advanced problem-solving, the raising of conceptual and technical skill levels, increased self-discipline, and enhanced
analytical thinking are essential parts of the class structure. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART
494. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 209) or instructor consent.
ART 310 Drawing Composition – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Drawing composition is a further investigation of
drawing and two-dimensional fundamentals with a concentration on developing personal and unique compositions
through the organization, layout, and design of the picture plane. An introduction to the conceptual underpinnings of
pictorial organization as a means to generate content and meaning. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 111, ART 209) or
instructor consent.
ART 312 Painting I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An introductory course in which classic and contemporary
techniques are explored through the method and materials used in oil painting. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492,
ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 111, ART 209, ART 211) or instructor consent.
ART 313 Watercolor Painting – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An introduction to the techniques and uses of various
water-soluble media. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART
111, ART 211) or instructor consent.
ART 314 Painting II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An introduction to the materials and techniques of indirect oil
painting, a multi-layered approach commonly executed over a monochrome underpainting; Emphasis is on developing
skills in paint handling and application, understanding and employing the transparent quality of oil paint; thoughtful
employment of composition and color mixing while investigating the formal and communicative potential of various
indirect painting approaches. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites: ART 312 or
instructor consent.
ART 315 Sculpture I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). The examination of concepts relating to three-dimensional design
beyond the introductory level. Students will be exposed to a variety of sculpture processes and materials. Prerequisites:
(ART 110, ART 121, ART 209) or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 226 ~
ART 316 Sculpture II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Continuation of ART 315; the student will be expected to show an
understanding of a variety of materials and processes. A degree of expertise is required in at least one process and related
material (example: welding-metal) knowledge of three-dimensional design must be demonstrated. Primer course for
ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 121, ART 315) or instructor consent.
ART 317 Interactive Design – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A project-based curriculum that teaches digital
communication skills in the context of the professional animation and interaction design process, using Adobe tools.
Design and technical work by its very nature is iterative, so the projects contain activities that require students to
evaluate and then redesign and rework their communications. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 111, [ART 103 or
equivalent], ART 230) or instructor consent.
ART 320 Commercial & Textile Prints – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A workshop that will focus on graphic-based
printing, especially silkscreen and relief printing with emphasis on commercial substrate, textile, and branding printing
from a contemporary perspective. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493 and ART 494. Prerequisites: None.
ART 321 Fine Art Print Production – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A workshop in beginning studio training in intaglio,
relief and silk-screen color printing for fine art use. The emphasis of this course is multiple and single impression
printing from a contemporary perspective. Primer course for ART 491, ART 492, ART 493, and ART 494. Prerequisites:
None.
ART 331 Graphic Design II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A continuation of ART 230 with an emphasis on
contemporary graphic design production techniques, problems, and solutions. Students will continue to develop layout
skills, learn effective methods in electronic pre-press print production, and effective software utilization. Addresses the
origins, significance, and consequence of identity and branding expressions, in diverse media, in terms of personal,
cultural, and commercial values. Using design research and studio methods, a series of exercises explores expressions of
individual and collective identity. Prerequisites: ART 230.
ART 332 Typography – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). The elegant use of type as visual communication. The exploration
of typographic history, structures, terminology, and methods will be used as a tool for design and visual problemsolving. Students learn typographic principles and methodology, letterform design, and typographic layout through a
series of projects computer applications. This is an intermediate level course that teaches how to develop creative graphic
design solutions to visual communication challenges. Prerequisites: ART 230.
ART 340 Digital Imaging for Designers – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An intermediate-level course focusing on the
use of computers as aids in designing artwork and as mediums for creative work. This course includes an introduction to
the concepts of using new media and how it relates to contemporary art theory and practice. This includes use of digital
cameras, scanners, computers and programs – specifically Adobe Photoshop. Work created will be produced for print
media, interactivity, and motion. This will culminate in the creation of a digital portfolio. Prerequisites: None.
ART 341 Advanced Digital Imaging for Designers – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An advanced-level course focusing
on the use of computers as aids in designing artwork and as mediums for creative work. In this class, students will learn
advanced working methods associated with digital compositing. This continues an in-depth study of Adobe Photoshop
and advanced features. Specific attention will be placed on compositing images and readying them for output for the web
and/or publishing. Work created will be produced for print media, interactivity, and motion. This will culminate in the
creation of a digital portfolio. Prerequisites: ART 340.
ART 401 Advanced Technical Problems – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A culminating studio course in art based on
experiences and skills acquired during the first three years of formal study. This class is a way for student’s (majors and
non-majors) to continue practicing a medium for which they’ve completed all lower level courses. Prerequisites: Senior
standing and written consent from major professor required.
ART 402 Senior Exhibition – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This class is designed for students who are completing all
required courses and expect to graduate at the end of that semester. In addition, the course is designed to teach students
professional practices within the arts so that they may know how to present themselves and their work in a professional
manner. The course culminates with the presentation of an exhibition of art work from the student’s area of
concentration, and the development of an artist’s statement, CV, digital portfolio, and promotional materials pertaining
to the exhibition. Prerequisites: Senior standing and written consent from major professor required.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 227 ~
ART 403 Classical Art – 3 credit hours. A study of the art and architecture of ancient Greece and its influence on the development
of the visual arts of the Roman Empire. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing.
ART 404 Medieval Art – 3 credit hours. A study of the influence of Christianity on the art of the western world as expressed in
early Christian, Romanesque, and Gothic architecture, sculpture, and painting. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing.
ART 405 Renaissance Art – 3 credit hours. A study of the visual arts of Italy from 1250 to 1550, taking into consideration the rise
of the artist as a creative individual and his expanding role in society. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing.
ART 406 Fashion Illustration – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). A course focusing on developing originality and creative
ability in the illustration of clothing with consideration of an individual’s personality, figure type, age and occasion for
which the clothing is to be worn. Prerequisites: (ART 110, ART 209, ART 309) or instructor consent.
ART 407 Illustration for Media – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This course will introduce students to the broad world of
sequential images. Students will produce a series of short assignments in different areas of focus within the world of
comics. In the process, students will be exposed to character development, story arc, pencils, and techniques.
Prerequisites: ART 110, ART 209, ART 230, ART 340.
ART 408 Internship – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). An intensive practicum experience at an approved business,
organization, or academic division. Students, under the direction of a faculty member and an on-site supervisor, are
required to engage in projects or assignments requiring at least five on-site hours per week for every half hour of credit.
Students will learn through observation, regular discussions with the on-site supervisor and faculty member, and written
reflection. In addition, students may be required to attend training events, workshops or weekly seminars. Prerequisites:
Senior standing.
ART 409 West African Art – 3 credit hours. The visual art traditions, including sculpture, ceramics, textiles, and architecture, of
the forest and savanna zones of West Africa. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing.
ART 412 Modern & Contemporary Art – 3 credit hours. An overview of international art since 1875. Focus is on the modern
contemporary periods starting with Impressionism and continuing to the present. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing.
ART 414 African-American Art – 3 credit hours. The study of major events, personalities and influences germane to the creation
of art by blacks in America, including visual slave themes, Pan-African art, “Black art” and blacks in mainstream art.
Prerequisites: Consult advisor.
ART 420 Design Portfolio – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Graphic Design Concentration capstone. A single project
theme extends in phases through an entire term to mirror the development sequence of complex professional design
projects. Essential to the process is that the medium is not predetermined. Offers students an opportunity to investigate a
topic of their choice, author and edit content, and determine the most effective medium for their message, which they
design to resonate with a specific audience. Central to the course is a substantive written problem definition and proposal
designed to integrate each student’s academic and design experience. Prerequisites: Senior standing, ART 430.
ART 430 Advanced Graphic Design I – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Advanced course of instructions for creating the
components necessary for the full development of an advertising campaign. Graphic Design, illustration, and web site
development will be taught utilizing the most current industry software. The student will also learn to assemble web
graphics through vector path applications. This course will emphasize the development of the student’s professional
print/web portfolio. Prerequisites: ART 331 or ART 332.
ART 431 Advanced Graphic Design II – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). Advanced web design, web animation, and
interactive media. Methods of developing the student’s comprehensive interactive portfolio are explored. Prerequisites:
ART 331 or ART 332.
ART 491 Directed Studio Studies – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This course will give the advanced students the ability
to pursue directed studio or history research beyond the existing courses in the applied studio areas. The content of the
course is to be determined by the student and the cooperating faculty. All projects will be directed to the completion of
the body of work or research to be curated into the ART 402 Senior Exhibition show or a public art lecture. The course 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 228 ~
also includes faculty critiques every other week to provide support to the work and the development of exhibition quality
artwork or research. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing only and permission of cooperating faculty.
ART 492 Advanced Directed Studio Studies – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This course is a continuation of ART 491
Directed Studio Studies will give the advanced students the ability to continue directed art into a larger, more mature
body of work. The content of the course is to be determined by the student and the cooperating faculty. All projects will
be directed to the completion of the body of work to be curated into the ART 402 Senior Exhibition show or a
lecture/publication. The course also includes faculty critiques every other week to provide support to the work and the
development of exhibition quality artwork and research. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing only and permission of
cooperating faculty.
ART 493 Directed Studio Studies: Studio – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This course will give the advanced students
the ability to pursue directed studio beyond the existing courses in the applied studio areas. The content of the course is
to be determined by the student and the cooperating faculty. All projects will be directed to the professional practice of
art making by collaboration with two faculty members engaged in studio activity. The course also includes the practices
of studio techniques and safety, art documenting, art installation, presentation, and archiving. Course requires a
minimum of 80 contact hours. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing only and permission of cooperating faculty.
ART 494 Directed Studio Studies: Collaboration – 3 credit hours (6 clock hours per week). This course will give the advanced
students the ability to pursue directed studio beyond the existing courses in the applied studio areas. The content of the
course is to be determined by the student and the cooperating collaborator. All projects will be directed to the
professional practice of art making by collaboration. The course also includes the practice of collaboration in art making
resulting in an exhibition of completed work. Collaborators can be faculty, peers, artists, or other outside sources in a
selected medium or interdisciplinary project. Course requires a minimum of 80 contact hours. Students may not enroll in
ART 493 concurrently. Prerequisites: Junior or senior standing only and permission of cooperating faculty.
Business Education
BED 425 Materials and Methods of Teaching Business Subjects – 3 credit hours. This course includes a study of basic methods,
strategies, instructional materials, and media that relate to the effective teaching of business education subjects. This
course represents a performance-based approach designed to enable the candidate to become an educational service
professional through the development of proficiencies specific to knowledge, skills, and dispositions required by the
national, regional, state and institutional stands.
BED 495 Internship in Secondary Education – 12 credit hours. This course entails one semester of full-time teaching under the
immediate direction of cooperating teachers and university supervisors in off-campus public (or approved private)
schools. Upon return to the campus, students share their experiences, discuss problems and develop new techniques in a
professional seminar. This course represents a performance-based approach to teacher education designed to enable the
candidate to become an educational service professional with knowledge, skills and dispositions required by institutional,
state, regional, and national standards. Through a constructivist design, learning will be facilitated by the candidates
participation in activities that will involve the intellect as well as dispositions. Creativity in learning will be facilitated by
collaboration and feedback that should result in continual reflection and self-assessment. The ultimate outcome of this
course is the further development of a skilled, highly proficient educational practitioner.
Biological & Environmental Sciences
BES 121 Introduction to Plant Biotechnology – 3 credit hours. This course is an introduction to biotechnology, including career
exploration, historical development and current applications in the areas of agriculture and the environment. The course
will present an overview of the techniques and underlying theory of plant tissue culture and genetic engineering, research
and commercial applications, and issues/challenges in the area of plant biotechnology. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or
instructor consent.
BES 301 Plant Biotechnology Applications – 3 credit hours. The course will explore the role of biotechnology for engineering
functional food, nutraceutical, pharmaceutical, and industrial crops including cosmetic, lubricants, renewable energy,
specialized wood products, etc. In this course, novel biotechnological approaches to engineering crops for production of
biofuels and technologies such as ethanol distillation using a variety of biomass raw materials and microorganisms will
be discussed. Students will also study the biodigester and how it can be used to transform waste into energy.
Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 229 ~
BES 325 Plant Biotechnology Techniques – 4 credit hours. The course will aim at teaching essential techniques in biotechnology
and genetic engineering. Students will gain hands-on experiential learning of concepts, instruments, use, and
maintenance. This course will be comprehensive and will involve organization of the molecular biology laboratory,
importance of maintaining aseptic conditions for tissue culture techniques. Students will also study the biodigester and
how it can be used to transform waste into energy. Prerequisites: BES 121 and BES 301.
BES 400 Biotechnology Apprenticeship – 4 credit hours. Each student is required to fulfill an internship, which could be in a
local, national, or international company/industry or government research laboratory. The objective of this internship is
to give students experience working outside a purely academic setting and enhance their ability to gain employment
upon graduation. The course instructor will be responsible for coordinating and facilitating apprenticeships at
participating biotechnology related businesses. Students will be mentored and trained by a designated supervisor at the
participating biotechnology-related business. Students will work on a project identified by the student and approved by
the instructor and industry supervisor. The student will submit a report and present a seminar on his/her work to faculty,
students, staff and industry personnel. Perquisites: Senior standing and completion of greater than 75% program course
requirements.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Plant Biotechnology program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
BES 401 Ethics in Biotechnology – 1 credit hour. The purpose of this course is to create an awareness of ethics in science,
particularly as it relates to biotechnology. The students will learn the rules governing ethical behavior of researchers and
academicians. The course involves a survey of the applications of biotechnology and examination of the consequences of
these applications. The course covers various aspects of biotechnology, including those that relate to plants,
microorganisms, agriculture and the environment. The instructor or guest speaker will introduce each topic and lead the
subsequent class discussion. Prerequisites: None.
Biology
BIO 100 Introduction to Careers in Life Sciences – 1 credit hour. Familiarization with all careers in life sciences. Required of all
majors. Prerequisites: None.
BIO 101 General Biology I – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture period x3 per week). The first part of a full year’s course in the
biological sciences. The first semester is devoted to an investigation of basic biological concepts and their application to
the variety of life. Selected examples from the major groups of animals and plants are used. For non-majors.
Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 101L.
BIO 101L General Biology I Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). Lab designed to enhance and accommodate
BIO 101. For non-majors majors. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 101.
BIO 101H Honors General Biology I & Lab – 4 credit hours. (3 clock hour lecture period per week. 3 clock hour lab period per
week). The first part of a full year’s course in the biological sciences. The first semester is devoted to an investigation of
basic biological concepts and their application to the variety of life. Selected examples from the major groups of animals
and plants are used. The course involves problem solving, discussions and critical analysis of current topics in the
biological sciences. For non-majors in the Honors Program. Prerequisites: None.
BIO 102 General Biology II – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture period x3 per week). A second semester course devoted to the
biology of humans. The problems of support, movement, supply of materials, distribution, waste removal, regulation and
reproduction are described in detail. For non-majors. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 102L.
BIO 102L General Biology II Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). Lab designed to enhance and accommodate
BIO 102. For non-majors. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 102.
BIO 102H Honors General Biology II – 3 credit hours. A second semester course devoted to the biology of humans. The problems
of support, movement, supply of materials, distribution, waste removal, regulation and reproduction are described in
detail. The course involves problem solving, discussions and critical analysis of current topics in human biology. For
non-majors in the Honors Program. Prerequisites: None. Co-requisite: BIO 102HL.
BIO 102HL Honors General Biology II Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Lab designed to accompany, enhance
and accommodate BIO 102H. For non-majors in the Honors Program. Prerequisites: None. Co-requisite: BIO 102H.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 230 ~
BIO 103 Principles of Biology – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture period x3 per week). A study of fundamental biological
principles with primary emphasis on molecular basis of life and cellular organization: cellular energetics and
metabolism; growth and reproduction, and genetics and evolution. Required of all majors. Prerequisites: None.
BIO 103L Principles of Biology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A customized lab to accommodate BIO 103
for majors. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 103.
BIO 104 Principles of Biology II & Lab – 4 credit hours. The second half of the Principles of Biology sequence. The course
explores the fundamentals of living organisms with emphasis on the ecological and evolutionary relationships of plants
and animals. This course provides an introduction to basic biological concepts in the areas of evolution, biological
diversity, zoology, botany, and ecology. The laboratory portion is required and is incorporated. This course may be taken
by Biology majors and non-majors. Prerequisites: BIO 103 & Lab.
BIO 200 Environmental Biology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to natural biological processes and their impact on man and his
environment. Emphasis is on problems caused by man’s use of the natural world along with an introduction to the
principles of applied and environmental microbiology. Specific topics to be discussed include environmental virology,
disinfection of water and wastewater, biogeochemical cycles, biology of waste treatment and biological aerosols.
Prerequisites: BIO 103.
BIO 201 Invertebrate Zoology – 3 credit hours. A study of the body plans, physiology, taxonomy and development of the major
groups of animals lacking backbones. Life histories of animals that affect the welfare of humans are stressed.
Prerequisites: BIO 103.
BIO 201L Invertebrate Zoology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 201 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 103L.
BIO 202 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy – 3 credit hours. Morphological study of the vertebrates with a comparative study of
the organic systems and their phylogenetic significance. Laboratory techniques in dissection of the frog and cat.
Prerequisites: BIO 103.
BIO 202L Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 201
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 103L.
BIO 203 General Botany I – 3 credit hours. A survey of the structure and physiology of seed bearing plants. Prerequisites: BIO
103.
BIO 203L General Botany I Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 203 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 103L.
BIO 204 General Botany II – 3 credit hours. A survey of the plant kingdom with particular emphasis on nomenclature, systems of
classification, reproduction, life cycles, and study of heredity and evolution. Prerequisites: BIO 103.
BIO 204L General Botany II Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 204 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 103L.
BIO 205 Ecology – 3 credit hours. Introduction to trophic relationships and energy transfer in ecosystem; discussion of
environmental factors that affect the distribution and abundance of animals and plants as well as the composition of
various communities. This course will review major ecological concepts, identify the techniques used by ecologists,
provide an overview of local and global environmental issues, and examine individual, group and governmental
activities important for protecting natural ecosystems. We will focus on aquatic and forest ecosystems. Student will
develop skills in research, writing, statistics, excel and prioritizing along with general science methodology, data
collection and analysis. Prerequisites: None.
BIO 206 Medical Terminology – 3 credit hours. Medical terminology is the study of the principles of medical word building.
Word building systems approach will be used to learn word parts that are used to construct or analyze new terms. The
course focuses on correct pronunciation, spelling and use of the medical terms. The course is organized by body systems,
pathological conditions, diagnostic tests, treatments and procedures. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 231 ~
BIO 220 Allied Health Microbiology & Lab – 4 credit hours (3 clock hour lecture period per week and 3 clock hour lab period per
week). The biology of microorganisms and their interactions with humans. The emphasis is on microbes with medical
and/or public health significance. Specific areas of study include characteristics of bacteria, host-parasite interactions;
basics of immunity; factors affecting human health and disease states; principles of disinfection and sterilization;
epidemiology of infectious disease with emphasis on transmission, prevention, and treatment; and nosocomial infection
risks and prevention. This course is designed for allied health professions such as nursing. Prerequisites: (BIO 103/L) or
(BIO 101/L and BIO 102/L).
BIO 221 Human Anatomy & Physiology I – 3 credit hours. A study of cell structure, function and organization, body covering
and thermal regulation, skeletal and muscular systems, central, peripheral, sensory nervous system, and cardiovascular
systems. Prerequisites: BIO 101 or BIO 102 or BIO 103.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
BIO 221L Human Anatomy & Physiology I Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 221
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 101L or BIO 102L or BIO 103L.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
BIO 222 Human Anatomy & Physiology II – 3 credit hours. Discussion of digestive system, nutrition, metabolism and energy
exchange respiratory, urinary, endocrine, reproductive systems prenatal development, aging and death, defenses against
disease, aviation, space and deep sea diving physiology. Prerequisites: BIO 101 or BIO 102 or BIO 103.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
BIO 222L Human Anatomy & Physiology II Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 222
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 101L or BIO 102L or BIO 103L.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
BIO 223 Introduction to Environmental Health – 3 credit hours. The fundamentals of environmental health, covering
environmental control agencies, elements of the environment suffering from pollution, environmental pollutants and
their sources, effects of environmental pollution, and methods of pollution control. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
BIO 311 Principles of Genetics – 3 credit hours. A primary emphasis on classical concepts with an integration of microbial and
molecular genetics at crucial points. Laboratory exercise includes use of plants, animals and microbes. Prerequisites:
CHE 101,CHE 101L, CHE102, CHE102L, BIO 103, BIO 103L. Corequisites: BIO 311L.
BIO 311L Principles of Genetics Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 311 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE101L, CHE102, CHE102L, BIO 103, BIO 103L. Corequisites: BIO 3ll.
BIO 321 Introduction to Parasitology – 3 credit hours. A survey of the parasitic protozoa and helminth found in man and animals.
Emphasis is placed on geographical distribution, morphology, habitat, life-cycles and methods of reproduction,
transmission, pathogenesis and symptomatology diagnosis, and prevention. Prerequisites: BIO 201, BIO 201L.
Corequisites: BIO 321L.
BIO 321L Introduction to Parasitology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 321
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 201, BIO 201L.
BIO 322 General Entomology – 3 credit hours. External and internal anatomy, physiology, life cycles, orders and control of
insects. Special emphasis will be placed upon species of economic importance in the South. Prerequisites: BIO 201, BIO
201L. Corequisites: BIO 322L.
BIO 322L General Entomology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 322 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 201, BIO 201L. Corequisites: BIO 322.
BIO 324 Ecotoxicology I – 3 credit hours. Principles of toxicology; introduction to metallic and organic poisons as environmental
pollutants; effects of poisons and environmental pollutants on life process. Prerequisites: BIO 205 or instructor consent.
BIO 325 Ecotoxicology II – 3 credit hours. Principles of toxicological bioassays will be introduced. Methods of bioassays
including microbial, vertebrate and chemical. Prerequisites: BIO 324.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 232 ~
BIO 330 Microbiology – 3 credit hours. A study of the properties of microorganisms, their influence on hygiene, disease
transmission, higher plants, animals, agriculture and industry. Instruction in laboratory techniques in identification,
staining and culturing selected microorganisms. Prerequisites: (BIO 101, BIO 101L) or (BIO 102, BIO 102L) or (BIO
103, BIO 103L).
BIO 330L Microbiology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 330 covering the lecture
topics. Prerequisites: (BIO 101, BIO 101L) or (BIO 102, BIO 102L) or (BIO 103, BIO 103L).
BIO 340 Developmental Biology – 3 credit hours. The embryology and morphogenesis of the vertebrates; fertilization of the egg,
stages of cleavage, and development of organs and systems. Laboratory studies of the development of the chick, pig and
human. Prerequisites: (BIO 221, BIO 221L) or (BIO 202, BIO 202L). Corequisites: BIO 340L.
BIO 340L Developmental Biology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 340 covering
the lecture topics. Prerequisites: (BIO 221, BIO 221L) or (BIO 202, BIO 202L). Corequisites: BIO 340.
BIO 344 Principles of Plant Taxonomy – 3 credit hours. Classification and identification of vascular plants. A brief discussion of
the process of speciation and evolution. Basic practice in the use of manuals and keys in identifying vascular plants.
Three two-hour classes per week. Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L. Corequisites: BIO 344L.
BIO 344L Principles of Plant Taxonomy Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 344
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L. Corequisites: BIO 344.
BIO 350 Selected Supplementary Topics in Science – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to cover selected topics in science
for Biology/Secondary Education majors. The course will focus on physics, chemistry, and earth science supporting
competencies for biology education majors. Supporting chemistry competencies covered in this class consists of
concepts of general chemistry, biochemistry, and basic laboratory techniques. Supporting physics competencies covered
in this course consist of light, sound, optics, electricity, energy and order, magnetism, and thermodynamics. Earth and
space science supporting competencies covered consist of energy and geochemical cycles, climate, oceans, weather,
natural resources, and changes in the earth. Further, this course will focus on implantation and utilization of science
specific technology. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP.
BIO 361 (PHY 361) Intro to Astrobiology – 3 credit hours. Astrophysics is the scientific study of the origin, evolution,
proliferation and search for life in the universe, an interdisciplinary topic at the intersection of astronomy, physics,
biology, chemistry, atmospheric science, and other sciences. This course introduces the major fields of current research
in astrobiology: the requirements for life as we know it, the origin and evolution of life on Earth, the possibilities of life
elsewhere in the universe, and the search for extraterrestrial – microbial or intelligent – life.
BIO 402 Limnology – 3 credit hours. A study of the physical and chemical factors affecting the biology ponds, lakes, reservoirs,
and streams. It includes the use of various instrumentations in biological monitoring. Prerequisites: (BIO 101, BIO 102,
CHE 101, CHE 102) or instructor consent. Corequisites: BIO 402L.
BIO 402L Limnology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 402 covering the lecture
topics. Prerequisites: (BIO 101L, BIO 102L, CHE 101L, CHE 102L) or instructor consent. Corequisites: BIO 402.
BIO 411 Cell and Molecular Biology – 3 credit hours. Detailed study of organelles of animal and plant cells and development and
structure of various kinds of tissues. Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L, CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L.
Corequisites: BIO 411L.
BIO 411L Cell and Molecular Biology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 411
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L, CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L.
Corequisites: BIO 411.
BIO 412 Molecular Biology – 3 credit hours. A study of the structure, behavior and function of the larger biological molecules
including biological oxidations, metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids and the genetic aspects of metabolism.
Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 102L. Corequisites: BIO 412L.
BIO 412L Molecular Biology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 412 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 102L. Co-requisite BIO 412.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 233 ~
BIO 421 Histotechniques – 3 credit hours. Microscopic study of the various tissues and organs of the animal systems.
Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L.
BIO 422 Pest Management – 3 credit hours. Discussions of all practices, such as chemical, cultural, physical, genetic or
biological, which bring about the most effective control of pests. Methods which bring about least ecological disruptions
will be stressed. Economic injury level and economic thresholds of several southern pests will be mentioned.
Prerequisites: BIO 322, BIO 322L.
BIO 430 Medical Microbiology – 3 credit hours. A study of the microorganisms producing disease in man and lower animals;
their means of transmission; and their protection against disease. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 430L.
BIO 430L Medical Microbiology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 430 covering
the lecture topics. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: BIO 430.
BIO 431 Principles of Immunology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to biological and chemical immunology concerned with the
nature of immune response and the structure features of antibodies and antigens which determine their qualitative
behavior and quantitative reactions; the range of immunological phenomena and their application to the solution of
biological and chemical problems. Prerequisites: BIO 330, BIO 330L, CHE 251, CHE 251L. Corequisites: BIO 431L.
BIO 431L Principles of Immunology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 431
covering the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 330, BIO 330L, CHE 251, CHE 251L. Corequisites: BIO 431.
BIO 433 Fundamentals of Epidemiology – 3 credit hours. Students will learn the fundamentals of epidemiology. Areas of
emphasis include epidemiology definitions and practical applications, measures of morbidity and mortality, descriptive
epidemiology, observational and experimental study designs, data interpretation issues, infectious disease epidemiology,
environmental epidemiology, and chronic disease epidemiology. Prerequisites: BIO 330, instructor consent, Applied
Statistics.
BIO 434 Principles of Physiology – 3 credit hours. BIO 434 is the study of the structural and functional organization of cells, and
how cellular function relates to body function. Processes such as enzymatic reactions, oxidative metabolism, cellular
transport, and bioelectrical mechanisms are discussed. The structure and function of the muscular system, the circulatory
system, the respiratory system, the digestive system, the reproductive system, the nervous system, the immune system,
and the endocrine system will be covered in this course. Prerequisites: BIO 221, BIO 221L, BIO 202, BIO 202L, CHE
251, CHE 251L. Co- requisite: BIO 434L.
BIO 434L Principles of Physiology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 434 covering
the lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 221, BIO 221L, BIO 202, BIO 202L, CHE 251, CHE 251L. Corequisites: Bio 434.
BIO 450 Radiation Biology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to basic concepts of various forms of radiation and their effects and
uses on living systems. Basic tracer techniques using isotopes will be represented in the laboratory. Prerequisites: (BIO
101, BIO 101L, BIO 102, BIO 102L) or (BIO 103 and BIO 103L).
BIO 451 Plant Anatomy – 3 credit hours. Study of plant cells, tissues and organ systems of vascular plants, their ontogeny,
differentiation and maturation. Students will learn modern techniques of preparing plant materials for microscopic study.
Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L. Corequisites: BIO 451L.
BIO 451L Plant Anatomy Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 451 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L. Corequisites: BIO 451.
BIO 454 Plant Pathology – 3 credit hours. History, nonparasitic, and parasitic diseases incited by bacteria fungi,
plasmodiophorales, nematodes and viruses will be discussed. Disease control through exclusion, eradication, protection
and post resistance will be mentioned. Prerequisites: BIO 344, BIO 344L. Corequisites: BIO 454L.
BIO 454L Plant Pathology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 454 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 344, BIO 344L. Corequisites: BIO 454.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 234 ~
BIO 461 Plant Physiology – 3 credit hours. The basic physical and chemical organization and metabolism in higher plants with
emphasis on various aspects of nutrition and growth. Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L.
Corequisites: 461L.
BIO 461L Plant Physiology Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). A companion lab for BIO 461 covering the
lecture topics. Prerequisites: BIO 203, BIO 203L, BIO 204, BIO 204L. Corequisites: BIO 461.
BIO 471 Biology Seminar – 1 credit hour. Discussions of biological literature, careers in biology, graduate schools, and specialty
schools. Pertinent discussions on current biological topics are held. Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L.
BIO 481 Research in Biology – 2-4 credit hours. Formation and execution of research projects in biology under supervision of an
advisor. Open only to junior and senior students. Prerequisites: BIO 471.
BIO 482 Biomedical Research – 1-3 credit credit hours. A course designed for students who plan to pursue graduate work in the
area of biomedical research. The course consists of performing research under the supervision of a qualified biomedical
research faculty member. The results of such research will be presented at a formal scientific meeting and published in a
recognized journal when possible. Prerequisites: Open only to junior and seniors with consent of biomedical research
faculty.
BIO 490 Biology Internships – 1-4 credit hours. A course designed as a preceptorship to allow students to gain experience in
actual job situations in areas of career interest. Prerequisites: Open only to juniors and seniors.
Business Administration
BUS 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Business Administration – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning
opportunity in the form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work
experience related to the student’s major field of study. Prerequisites: MGT 250; A student must be at least a sophomore,
registered with Career Development Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major
to register for this course. The student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to
and after completion in order to receive ELO course credit.
Career Development
CDS 301 Career Development Seminar – 1 credit hour. This course offers resume writing, interviewing skills, values clarification,
job research techniques and other related topics in the area of career development.
Civil Engineering
CE 101 Introduction to Civil Engineering – 3 credit hours. Introduction to civil engineering profession and societies; basics of
civil engineering including structural, transportation, geotechnical, environmental and water resources engineering,
sketching and drawing, ethics, principles of design; local field trips and guest lectures are also included. Prerequisites:
None.
CE 201 Surveying – 3 credit hours. (1 clock hour lecture and 3 clock hour lab period per week). A study of measurement and
error calculation, leveling, traverse and area computation, topographic mapping, triangulation, highway, public land and
construction surveying. Computer applications are included. Prerequisite: None. Corequisites: EGC 101 or instructor
consent.
CE 304 Environmental Engineering – 3 credit hours. A survey of environmental pollution and control involving the air, land, and
water environments; the management of the environment; and other problems concerning water and sewage treatment,
solid waste disposal and treatment. Prerequisites: (CHE 102, CHE 102L, MTH 238) or instructor consent.
CE 305 Hydrogeology – 3 credit hours. The study of a hydrologic cycle with emphasis on precipitation and runoff, stream flow
and groundwater distribution. Geology of groundwater occurrence, groundwater contamination, development and
management are also covered. Prerequisites: EGC 204, EGC 305.
CE 306 Structural Analysis I – 3 credit hours. An analysis of stresses and deflections in statically determinate structures caused
by fixed and moving loads; study of influence lines and loading criteria for beams and plane trusses; and introduction to
classical analysis of indeterminate structures including the slope deflection and moment distribution methods.
Application of computer techniques to structural problems is required. Prerequisites: MTH 227, EGC 207.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 235 ~
CE 308 Soil Mechanics – 3 credit hours. A study of origin, formation, classification, identification and subsurface exploration of
soil. Physical and mechanical properties of soils, shear strength, consolidation, settlement, and bearing capacity are also
covered. Laboratory is included. Prerequisites: EGC 207. Corequisites: EGC 207L.
CE 308L Soil Mechanics Lab. – 1 credit hour (2 clock hour lab period per week). The purpose of this course is to present a
selection of experiments that will demonstrate the principles of Soil Mechanics. A Laboratory Manual for this course
will be used for performing these experiments. Prerequisites: EGC 207. Corequisites: CE 308.
CE 310 Transportation Systems and Materials – 3 credit hours. Transportation systems including land and air transportation for
passenger movement; functions of transportation systems; vehicles and controls; transportation system planning,
operation, maintenance, safety and transportation material testing are addressed in this course. Prerequisites: EGC 101,
EGC 205, CE 201.
CE 401 (CE 501) Structural Steel Design – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the design of steel structures to include behavior of
members and their connections. Theoretical and practical basis for proportioning members are addressed. Prerequisites:
CE 306.
CE 402 (CE 502) Reinforced Concrete Design – 3 credit hours. A study of the theory and design of reinforced concrete
members. Design considerations for concrete bridges and buildings are included. Prerequisites: CE 306.
CE 404 (CE 504) Hydraulic Engineering and Design – 3 credit hours. A study of the similitude, and flow measurement; open
channel flow, pipe flow and their applications; and design of various elements of hydraulic structures. Prerequisites:
EGC 204, EGC 207, EGC 305.
CE 405 Concrete and Aggregates – 3 credit hours. A study of engineering properties of plain concrete; influence of cement,
aggregates, water and mixtures on the properties of fresh and hardened concretes; mix design behavior under various
types of loading and environments. Prerequisites: EGC 207.
CE 406 Computer Analysis of Structures – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on flexibility and stiffness methods of analysis.
Development of matrix methods for both trusses and rigid frames and use of the computer in structural analysis,
including finite element method are included. Prerequisites: CE 306, EGC 104.
CE 408 (CE 508) Foundation Design – 3 credit hours. The study of shallow and deep foundation elements, determination of
bearing capacity of spread footings, mat and pile foundations. This course also includes instruction on drilled caissons
and piers as well as lateral earth pressure and the design of retaining structures. Prerequisites: CE 308. Corequisites: CE
402.
CE 409 (CE 509) Public Health Engineering – 3 credit hours. A study of the engineering aspects involved in the control of the
environment for the protection of health and the promotion of the comfort of man. Discussion will include
communicable disease control, air pollution, refuse disposal, industrial hygiene, and radiological health hazards.
Prerequisites: CE 304.
CE 410 (CE 510) Transportation Engineering and Design – 3 credit hours. A study of engineering and design basics for highway
transportation; elements of highway transportation and their characteristics; drivers; vehicles, volume, density, speed,
and travel time; design for safety, service, and economy; highway alignment, cross section and geometric design
elements. Prerequisites: CE 310. Corequisites: EGC 204.
CE 411 Urban Transportation Planning – 3 credit hours. A study of functions and elements of urban transportation including
modeling trip generation, trip attraction, modal split and network assignment; integrated models, and computer
applications. Prerequisites: (EGC 204, CE 310) or instructor consent.
CE 412 (CE 512) Pavement Systems – 3 credit hours. A study of the design of highway and airport pavement systems;
subgrades, subbases and bases; flexible and rigid pavements; drainage and earthwork; pavement evaluation and
maintenance. Prerequisites: EGC 207, CE 310.
CE 413 Construction Management – 3 credit hours. An introduction to construction project planning and scheduling by network
diagrams. Estimating and project control fundamentals. Various equipment and productivity are included. Prerequisites:
Senior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 236 ~
CE 414 Design of Timber Structures – 3 credit hours. A study of wood as an engineering design material. Beams, columns,
plywood design, and glued laminated structural members as used in actual design and construction are covered.
Prerequisites: CE 306.
CE 415 Transportation Materials: Characterization and Design – 3 credit hours. Covers the characterization and design of
transportation materials: asphalt binder, aggregates, and hot mix asphalt; properties of aggregates, asphalt binder and hot
mix asphalt; AASHTO characterization of aggregates and binder; Superpave mix design; Superpave performance tests;
pavement performance and maintenance; practical applications and recent developments; transportation laboratory will
be used for this course. Prerequisites: CE 310 or instructor consent.
CE 424 Civil Engineering Practice – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the practical concepts necessary to a practicing engineer,
such as engineering ethics, engineering economics, estimating, cost analysis, contract bidding, and specification writing.
Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
CE 440 Fundamentals of Engineering – 0 credit hours (1 clock hour per week). This course provides a review on the
fundamentals of civil engineering as presented in the FE exam. The one-hour class is offered once a week in the fall
semester and taught by CE faculty members. Attending the course is mandatory to graduate and the class grade is a
Pass/Fail. The course enhances the student’s ability to practice and solve basic problems on statistics, statics, dynamics,
materials, transportation, hydraulics, soil mechanics and foundations, structural analysis and reinforced concrete.
Prerequisites: graduating seniors.
CE 450 Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow – 3 credit hours. A study of the mechanics of fluid flow in open channels, as an
extension of basic engineering hydraulics and experimental concepts applied to the theory, design, and shape
optimization of open channels. Classification of flow, channel cross section, hydraulic jump, stilling basins, specific
energy, culvert hydraulics, and the use of design charts and tables are included. Prerequisites: EGC 305.
CE 455 (CE 555) Wastewater Treatment – 3 credit hours. An introduction to wastewater characteristics and treatment processes;
biological mechanism, reactors, waste treatment, and kinetics. The engineering design of physical processes such as
sedimentation, thickening, and filtration, as well as chemical processes, processing of sludge and advanced wastewater
treatment processes are included. A field trip to wastewater treatment plant is required. Prerequisites: (CE 304, EGC
305) or instructor consent.
CE 456 Solid Waste Disposal – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the problem of solid waste management; types and quantities
of wastes; collection and transportation of wastes; composting, landfill and incineration; and recycling of wastes and
resource recovery. Prerequisites: CE 304 or instructor consent.
CE 457 Hazardous Waste Management – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous
wastes. Legal aspects of hazardous materials, cleanup of hazardous material spills, and the impact of hazardous materials
on the environment are all covered. Prerequisites: CE 304 or instructor consent.
CE 460 Computer-Aided Design in Civil Engineering – 3 credit hours (2 clock hour lecture and 3 clock hour lab period per
week). A course which focuses on the design of Civil Engineering structures/systems using computers. Utilization of
graphics and component design programs as design tools is required. Prerequisites: EGC 101 and senior standing.
CE 470 Civil Engineering Design Project – 3 credit hours. An individualized or grouped civil engineering design project
completed under supervision of instructor. Prerequisites: Must have completed at least two CE design courses or
instructor consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Civil Engineering program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
CE 473 Earth Structures Engineering – 3 credit hours. The course provides the student with an introduction to the principles of
geotechnical analysis and design of axially loaded piles, lateral earth pressures and applications in the design of retaining
walls including cantilever, gravity and mechanically stabilized earth, and sheet piles. The course also includes methods
of stability analyses for retaining walls, earth slopes and embankments. Prerequisites: CE 308.
CE 480 Special Topics – 3 credit hours. A course covering selected topics in Civil Engineering. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 237 ~
Chemistry
CHE 101 General Chemistry I – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamental laws of matter that govern physical and chemical
changes. Atomic and molecular theories, atomic structure, periodic functions and classification of the elements are
addressed. Required of all majors in chemistry. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 101L.
CHE 101H General Chemistry I Honors – 3 credit hours. Recommended for all students in AAMU Honors Program. Topics covered
are the same as in CHE 101 but in more depth and with more rigor. A study of the fundamental laws of matter that
govern physical and chemical changes. Atomic and molecular theories, atomic structure, periodic functions and
classification of the elements are address. Required of all majors in chemistry. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE
101HL.
CHE 101L General Chemistry I Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to accompany CHE 101. Basic
exercises in general chemistry, to include fundamental operations used in making scientific measurements; properties of
gases, liquids and solids, chemical elements and compounds. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 101.
CHE 101HL General Chemistry I Lab Honors – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to accompany CHE 101
Honors. Recommended for all students in AAMU Honors Program. Topics covered are the same as in CHE 101L but in
more depth and with more rigor. Basic exercises in general chemistry, to include fundamental operations used in making
scientific measurements; properties of gases, liquids and solids, chemical elements and compounds. Prerequisites: None.
Corequisites: CHE 101H.
CHE 102 General Chemistry II – 3 credit hours. A study of radioactivity, solutions and electrolytes, ionization; properties, and
reactions and uses of important metallic and non-metallic elements. The course includes an introduction to qualitative
analysis. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L. Corequisites: CHE 102L.
CHE 102H General Chemistry II Honors – 3 credit hours. Recommended for all students in AAMU Honors Program. Topics
covered are the same as in CHE 102 but in more depth and with more rigor. A study of radioactivity, solutions and
electrolytes, ionization; properties, and reactions and uses of important metallic and non-metallic elements. The courses
includes an introduction to qualitative analysis. Prerequisites: CHE 101H, CHE 101HL. Corequisites: CHE 102HL.
CHE 102L General Chemistry II Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to accompany CHE 102. An
introduction to quantitative and qualitative analyses. Acid-base titrations, reaction kinetics, and qualitative analyses of
the elements are covered. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L. Corequisites: CHE 102.
CHE 102HL General Chemistry II Lab Honors – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to accompany CHE 102
Honors. Recommended for all students in AAMU Honors Program. Topics covered are the same as in CHE 102L but in
more depth and with more rigor. An introduction to quantitative and qualitative analysis. Acid-base titrations, reaction
kinetics, and qualitative analyses of the elements are covered. Prerequisites: CHE 101H, CHE 101HL. Corequisites:
CHE 102H.
CHE 111 Applied Chemistry I – 3 credit hours. A course designed to explore historical and modern day applications of chemical
principles to the solution of problems and the contribution of chemistry to modern technological achievements. Some
field trips to manufacturing facilities and other appropriate chemically-oriented facilities may be scheduled. Not open to
chemistry majors and minors as a substitute for CHE 101 or CHE 121. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 111L.
CHE 111L Applied Chemistry I Lab – 1 credit hour. A laboratory course to accompany CHE 111. Included are basic exercises in
general chemistry, to include fundamental operations used in making scientific measurements; properties of gases,
liquids, solids, chemical elements and compounds. Not open to chemistry majors and minors as a substitute for CHE 101
or CHE 121. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 111.
CHE 112 Applied Chemistry II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of CHE 111, with continued emphasis on modern technological
achievements. Field trips will be scheduled as appropriate. Not open to chemistry majors and minors as a substitute for
CHE 102 or CHE 122. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 112L.
CHE 112L Applied Chemistry II Lab – 1 credit hour. A laboratory course to accompany CHE 112. A continuation of CHE 111L, to
include polymer and dye synthesis, recycling of wastes and other selected experiments. Not open to chemistry majors
and minors as a substitute for CHE 102 or CHE 122. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: CHE 112.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 238 ~
CHE 221 Analytical Chemistry – 3 credit hours. Three lectures, one three-hour laboratory per week. A detailed study of the
principles of acid-base, complex ions, slightly soluble salt equilibria, electrometric, and spectrophotometric methods and
an introduction to special instrumental methods in analytical chemistry. Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102,
CHE 102L) or (CHE 121, CHE 121L, CHE 122, CHE 122L. Corequisites: CHE 221L.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
CHE 221L Analytical Chemistry Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 221. A study of classical wet and dry methods
as well as electrometric, spectrometric, and chromatographic methods. Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102,
CHE 102L) or (CHE 121, CHE 121L, CHE 122, CHE 122L). Corequisites: CHE 221.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
CHE 231 Introduction to Forensic Chemistry – 3 credit hours. To introduce students to the major forensic disciplines such as
firearms, arson materials, explosive materials, trace evidence, forensic biology, evidence gathering. Evidence includes
soils, hair, fibers, paints (surface coating), forensic toxicology, drugs. Biological methods used for the analysis of
forensic evidence. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L, CHE 221, CHE 221L.
CHE 231L Introduction to Forensic Chemistry Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 231.
CHE 251 Organic Chemistry I – 3 credit hours. A course designed to give the student a thorough working knowledge of the
fundamentals of organic chemistry. The nomenclature, structure, properties and reactions of organic compounds are
studied from an integrated approach, considering the interrelationships of structure, properties, and reactions. The topics
will include saturated and unsaturated aliphatic compounds, alicyclic compounds, aromatic compounds, alcohols, and
alkyl and aryl halides. Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L) or (CHE 121, CHE 121L, CHE 122,
CHE 122L). Corequisites: CHE 251L.
CHE 251L Organic Chemistry I Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 251. The laboratory work including basic
techniques and experiments in synthesis and kinetics. Modern instrumental methods will be used in some experiments.
Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L) or (CHE 121, CHE 121L, CHE 122, CHE 122L).
Corequisites: CHE 251.
CHE 252 Organic Chemistry II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of the first semester. Lecture topics will include ethers, carboxylic
acids, sulfonic acids, amines, aldehydes and ketones, diazo compounds, glycols, carbohydrates, and amino acids.
Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L. Corequisites: CHE 252L.
CHE 252L Organic Chemistry II Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 252. The laboratory work will emphasize
qualitative organic analysis by chemical reactions. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L: Corequisites: CHE 252.
CHE 303 Inorganic Chemistry – 3 credit hours. This course is provided to develop student’s understanding in the basic concepts of
bonding in molecules, introduction to symmetry, chemistry of the main group elements, coordination chemistry of the
transition elements, organometallic chemistry, solid state chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, chemistry of the lanthanide,
and actinide elements. Credit for this course will be counted toward the degree requirement. Prerequisites: CHE 101,
CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE 102L.
CHE 303L Inorganic Chemistry Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 303.
CHE 306 Chemical Synthesis – 3 credit hours. Course designed to give the student experience beyond the introductory level in
laboratory preparative techniques, in both organic and inorganic chemistry (approximately equal emphasis on each).
Procedures will be taken from the original literature and will emphasize a variety of the more important types of
preparative techniques. Prerequisites: CHE 252, CHE 252L.
CHE 308 Special Topics – 3 credit hours. A course designed to help the chemistry major begin to fully grasp the fundamental
concepts which undergird the understanding and practice of chemistry. Topics will vary according to student need but
will usually embrace such subjects as atomic theory (from the Bohr atom to atomic and molecular orbitals), reaction
mechanisms, equilibria, kinetics, electrochemistry, thermodynamics, nuclear and radiochemistry, molecular spectroscopy
and chromatography. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L.
CHE 311 Applied Organic Chemistry I – 4 credit hours. A course designed to show the relationship of organic chemistry to
everyday life. Topics for discussion will embrace the effect of selected discoveries and innovations in organic chemistry 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 239 ~
upon the development of present-day technology. Laboratory exercises will include the production of nylon, aspirin,
certain dyes, and other technologically important substances. Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE
102L). Not open to chemistry majors and minors as a substitute for 301.
CHE 312 Applied Organic Chemistry II – 4 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x3 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). A
continuation of CHE 311 with further emphasis on technological aspects of organic chemistry. Laboratory exercises will
involve additional experiments as described for CHE 311. Prerequisites: CHE 311. Not open to chemistry majors and
minors as a substitute for CHE 252.
CHE 315 Chemistry Seminar – 1 credit hour. This course will provide an interdisciplinary postgraduate professional school
preparation for students. The postgraduate professional school preparation will include test preparation for the entry level
exams required for admission into the programs(i.e., MCAT, DAT, PCAT, and GRE). In addition to test preparation,
seminars will be held that includes personal experiences from professionals in various fields, and professional
development with respect to the application and interviewing process. The course will also guide students toward
internship opportunities in chemistry and medically related fields. Prerequisites: (CHE 101, CHE 102, CHE 251) or
special permission.
CHE 330 Environmental Chemistry Lecture – 3 credit hours. In this course students will use the fundamental principles of
chemistry to gain an understanding of the source, fate, and reactivity of compounds in natural and polluted environments.
Emphasis will be placed on the environmental implications of energy utilization and on the chemistry of the atmosphere,
hydrosphere, and lithosphere. Environmental issues that will be discussed include climate change, air pollution,
stratospheric ozone depletion, pollution and treatment of water sources, and the utilization of insecticides and herbicides.
Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 102, CHE 221, CHE 251, CHE 252.
CHE 331 Forensic Toxicology – 3 credit hours. To introduce the student to the practices and policies of forensic toxicology. Give
the student basic guidelines on how to analytically approach samples of suspected toxins as well as samples where no
information is available as to what toxic substance, if any, may be present. The course will also cover problems in
interpretation of analytical findings along with those methods that are considered insufficient for trial and those that are
considered the gold standards as accepted by today’s judiciary. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L, CHE 102, CHE
102L, CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 231, CHE 231L.
CHE 350 Selected Supplementary Topics in Science – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to cover selected topics in science.
Specifically, the course will focus on biology, physics, and earth science supporting competencies for chemistry and is
designed for chemistry education majors. Supporting biology competencies covered in this class consist of molecular
biology, bioenergetics, and ecology. Supporting physics competencies covered in the course consist of energy, stellar
change over time, properties and functions of waves, properties and functions of motions, properties and functions of
forces, electricity, and magnetism. Earth and space science supporting competencies covered consist of energy and
geochemistry, cycles of matter, and energetics of earth systems. Further, this course will focus on implementation and
utilization of science specific technology. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP.
CHE 401 Physical Chemistry I – 3 credit hours. A study of the gas laws; classical thermodynamics, thermochemistry, single and
multicomponent phase equilibria, properties of solutions, and chemical equilibria. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L,
CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L. Corequisites: CHE 401L.
CHE 401L Physical Chemistry I Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 401. To the extent possible, the laboratory
experiments will be selected to coincide with the lecture topics. Experiments relating to gas laws, thermodynamics,
thermochemistry, solids, solutions and chemical equilibria will be performed. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE
251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L. Corequisites: CHE 401.
CHE 402 Physical Chemistry II – 3 credit hours. A study of chemical kinetics, electrolytic conductance phenomena, electromotive
force, quantum theory, molecular structure and spectroscopy, macromolecules, surface chemistry, crystals, and nuclear
chemistry. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L, CHE 401, CHE 401L.
CHE 402L Physical Chemistry II Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 402. To the extent possible, the laboratory
experiments will be selected to coincide with the lecture topics. Experiments relating to gas laws, thermodynamics,
thermochemistry, solids, solutions and chemical equilibria will be performed. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE
251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L, CHE 401, CHE 401L. Corequisites: CHE 402.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 240 ~
CHE 403L Research in Chemistry I – 2 credit hours. Laboratory and library work that involves the solution of a suitable problem in
an area of the student's interest to culminate in an investigative paper required of all majors. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Chemistry program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
CHE 404L Research in Chemistry II – 2 credit hours. Laboratory and library work that involves the solution of a suitable problem
in area of the student's interest to culminate in an investigative paper required of all majors. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Chemistry program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
CHE 405 Advanced Organic Chemistry I – 3 credit hours. A course designed to emphasize the mechanisms of the more important
organic reactions and the various molecular rearrangements involved. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252,
CHE 252L.
CHE 406 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry II – 3 credit hours. A detailed study of the quantum theory, atomic and molecular
structure, the periodic table, theories of chemical bonding, and the chemistry of inorganic complex compounds.
Emphasis will be placed on the qualitative aspects of ligand field theory. Prerequisites: CHE 405.
CHE 407 Biochemistry I – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide a study of the molecular basis of life: chemical
compositions of living cells, the relation between the structure and the function of proteins in biological systems, the
isolation and purification of proteins, enzymatic kinetics and reaction mechanisms, coenzymes, and carbohydrate
catabolism for generation of energy. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L.
CHE 407L Biochemistry I Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory to accompany CHE 407. The course will include the isolation and
purification of proteins, protein quantitation, molecular weight determination of protein by gel electrophoresis, peptide
mapping analysis, affinity chromatography, and enzymatic kinetics. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE
252L. Corequisites: CHE 407.
CHE 408 Biochemistry II – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x3 periods per week). This course is designed to provide a study of
metabolic reactions and regulations of metabolic pathways for polysaccharides and glycoproteins, fatty acids, lipids,
cholesterol, amino acids, and nucleotides; and fundamental principles of storage and utilization of genetic information,
including structures of DNA and RNA, DNA replication, transcription, and protein biosynthesis. Prerequisites: CHE
251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L, CHE 407.
CHE 408L Biochemistry II Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to accompany CHE 408. In this
course students are taught the modern biochemical topics such as protein evolution and Western blot, effects of
temperature on cell respiration, protein separation by gel-filtration chromatography, determination of the length of DNA
molecules by gel electrophoresis, restriction nuclease mapping of DNA, and plasmid DNA structure. Prerequisites: CHE
251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L, CHE 407, CHE 407L. Corequisites: CHE 408.
CHE 409 Instrumental Methods and Materials Evaluation – 3 credit hours. A lecture course designed to expand the student's
background in modern analytical techniques such as spectrophotometry, chromatography, electrophoresis, mass
spectrometry, FTIR, roton NMR and Carbon -13 NMR spectroscopy. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 251,
CHE 251L.
CHE 409L Instrumental Methods and Materials Evaluation Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to
accompany CHE 409. In this course students are taught the usage and operation of modern analytical instruments, analysis of
data collected and interpretation of results using a variety of databases available. Emphasis is placed on HPLC, GC. GC/MS,
FTIR, TGA, DTA, carbon and proton NMR. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 251, CHE 251L.
CHE 411 Qualitative Organic Analysis – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). A
systematic study involving classification reactions and physical properties of organic compounds and their identification.
Reactions of various functional groups, along with solubility measurements, are used to elucidate structural features of
compounds. Instrumental methods such as infrared, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, gas chromatography, and
mass spectrometry are used as supplementary identification techniques. Prerequisites: CHE 221, CHE 221L, CHE 251,
CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 241 ~
CHE 412 Organometallic Chemistry – 3hrs. This course will provide a detailed understanding into the transition metal
organometallic chemistry. It will develop the student’s understanding in bonding theory, synthesis and reactivity of
sigma – bonded alkyls and aryls, metal carbonyls, and pi- bonded organic ligands such as alkenes, alkynes, allyls, and
arenes. Applications of organometallic complexes in organic synthesis and industrial catalysis. Credit for this course will
be counted toward the degree requirement. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L, CHE 252, CHE 252L, CHE 303.
CHE 421 Polymer Chemistry – 3 credit hours. Introduction to polymer chemistry. Mechanisms of polymerization reactions of
monomer and molecular weight distributions of products; principles, limitations and advantages of most important
methods of molecular weight determination; relationship of physical properties to structure and composition; correlations
of applications with chemical constitution. Prerequisites: (CHE 251 and CHE 252) or equivalents.
CHE 431 Forensic Chemistry Seminar – 1 credit hour. To introduce the student to the readings of forensic chemistry and also
introduce the student to the demonstrations of the computer forensic tools and processes. Prerequisites: CHE 231, CHE
231L, CHE 331.
CHE 441 Forensic Practicum – 3 credit hours. The practicum provides students with supervised forensic laboratory experience. It
is developed to provide opportunities for students to integrate didactic and theoretical training with applied experience in
forensic chemistry. The practicum is viewed by the program as introductory laboratory experiences that enable students
to become familiar with various forensic science setting.
CHE 450 Nuclear and Radio Chemistry – 3 credit hours.
Chinese
CHN 101 Basic Chinese Language – 3 credit hours. The objective of this Chinese course is to help beginners grasp the
pronunciation of Chinese, skillfully use Pinyin, understand the basic grammar and structure of Chinese, and know a
substantial number of frequently used characters and essential grammar points. Prerequisites: None.
CHN 102 Chinese Writing – 3 credit hours. This course will develop students' written Chinese skills through use of the textbook,
course readings, workbook, and class meetings. The course uses the HSK test to help the students improve their Chinese.
Prerequisites: CHN 101.
CHN 401 Studies in Chinese Culture – 3 credit hours. Study of Chinese culture especially the elements of traditional culture and
their functions and the ethos of ancient Chinese society. Emphasis will be placed on values and the historical and cultural
heritage. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or equivalent.
Construction Management
CMG 101 Introduction to Construction Management – 2 credit hours. Study of construction industry practice emphasizing business
organizations and management techniques and career opportunities. Topics include organizational environments,
decision making, design, technology, leadership, and basic construction management including terminology, quantity
take-offs, estimating, planning, scheduling and inspection. Occasional field trips required. Prerequisites: None.
CMG 105 Introduction to Construction Materials – 2 credit hours. Introduction to basic construction materials, to their properties in
place in completed projects and to their characteristics that affect construction processes. Overview and study of the
principal construction materials used within the construction industry: concrete, masonry, metals, woods, thermal
materials, finishes, construction equipment, and specialties. Labs and field trips are required. Prerequisites: None.
CMG 110 Blue Print Reading & Construction Plans – 3 credit hours. The students will be exposed to the whole spectrum of
construction blueprint reading—from what a blueprint is to how to make use of a set of plans. The students will learn the
proper meaning of the construction symbols, abbreviations, and keynotes common to construction for all trades; the
difference in the plan groups and how they are applied to a project; how to associate plans, sections, and details on
blueprints to get a better understanding of the object(s) noted; and how to determine the coordination of the plans and
how to reference the plans to each other. Prerequisites: None.
CMG 201 Construction Surveying – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 3 clock hour lab period per week). Fundamental
principles of measurement and error calculation, construction leveling, traverse and area calculations, construction
topographic mapping, triangulation, highway construction, public land and construction. Computer application.
Prerequisites: CMG 110.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 242 ~
CMG 217 Statics & Structural Analysis – 3 credit hours. A study of force systems in equilibrium and their action on bodies at rest.
The course also covers the methods of joints and sections for the solution of trusses, friction, and first and second
moments of areas. The course emphasizes development of problem solving skills. Co-requisite: MTH 113.
CMG 218 Strength of Materials – 3 credit hours. A study of the concepts of stress, strain, and Hooke’s Law. Also studied is the
strength and deformation of axial force members, shafts, beams, and columns, and an introduction to combined stress.
Prerequisites: CMG 217.
CMG 225 Computer Applications for Construction – 3 credit hours. Computer-based construction project management techniques
for planning, scheduling, estimating, cost optimization, cash flow analysis, bidding, accounting and project control.
Prerequisites: CMG 101. Corequisites: CMG 250.
CMG 250 Construction Estimating – 3 credit hours. Detailed unit price cost estimating including quantity takeoff, labor, material,
mechanical and electrical systems, equipment unit pricing and computer-aided estimation applications. The course will
also examine bidding strategies, worker and equipment productivity, and value engineering. Prerequisites: CMG 105.
Corequisites: CMG 110.
CMG 300 Construction Methods – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the techniques, methods, and materials of building and road
construction. Excavation, foundations, framing, masonry, roofing, finishing, and mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
systems are covered. Prerequisites: CMG 218, CMG 105. Corequisites: CMG 201.
CMG 301 Construction Materials & Testing – 3 credit hours. A two hour lecture class and a 2 hour lab class. Properties of concrete,
masonry, metals, woods, thermal materials and hot mix asphalt. Construction materials testing and inspection procedures
in laboratory and field situations using standard testing equipment, methods and field inspection techniques. Testing
concrete, steel, wood, soils, aggregate, asphalt and masonry materials and samples relative to ASTM testing standards,
laboratory reports, computer analysis, data collection and simulated field inspections. Prerequisites: CMG 105, CMG
218.
CMG 306 Construction Planning & Scheduling – 3 credit hours. Study the fundamentals of planning and scheduling of construction
projects. Introduction to all of the aspects and techniques of scheduling such as precedence diagrams, activity durations,
contract provisions, resource allocation and leveling, money, project monitoring and control, computer scheduling, CPM
and PERT methods, earned value, productivity, litigation, short-interval schedules, linear scheduling, arrow diagrams
and, scheduling using Primavera and Microsoft projects. Prerequisites: CMG 101.
CMG 308 Soil Mechanics & Foundations – 3 credit hours. A two hour lecture class and a two hour lab class. Study of origin,
formation, classification, identification and subsurface exploration of soil. Physical and mechanical properties of soils,
shear strength, consolidation, settlement, lateral earth pressure and bearing capacity. Introduction to foundation analysis.
Prerequisites: CMG 218.
CMG 310 Construction Contracts and Law – 3 credit hours. Examine the major legal issues concerning the construction industry.
Topics include an overview of participants; bidding and contract formation; typical construction contracts and
conditions; subcontracts; architects and engineers; privacy of contracts; defaults/termination; changed conditions;
changes/extra work; lien law; surety bonds; fraud, duress, and mistakes; delays; and alternative dispute resolution.
Corequisites: MGT 207.
CMG 315 Heavy Constructions – 3 credit hours. Construction methods and management of heavy construction projects including
highways, bridges, tall buildings, dams, tunnels, waste treatment facilities, governmental buildings and underground
facilities. Prerequisites: CMG 300, CMG 301, CMG 308.
CMG 318 Mechanical and Electrical Systems – 3 credit hours. Basic study of the primary mechanical and electrical equipment and
systems used in buildings. Design principles for selecting and sizing various systems are stressed throughout the course.
Mechanical topics include plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, water supply, fire protection, and sanitary
sewer systems. Electrical topics include basic principles of electricity, single and three phase systems, transformers,
branch circuits and feeders and residential and commercial illumination. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 243 ~
CMG 320 Leadership in Construction – 3 credit hours. Models of construction leadership for the 21st Century, application of
transformational leadership to strategic planning and marketing in construction contracting and, leadership and strategic
problem solving in construction and methods. Prerequisites: CMG 310. Corequisites: MGT 207.
CMG 350 Construction Safety – 3 credit hours. Explanation of requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act and other
related federal and state legislation as applied to the construction industry. Standards for accident prevention, hazard
identification, and responsibility for compliance emphasized. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
CMG 400 Construction Accounting – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the long-term contract methods for recognizing revenue and
their impact on financial statements. An analysis of financial statements and their use in developing budgets, projecting
cash needs, pricing construction projects, and forecasting the impact of business decisions on profit. Prerequisites: Senior
standing.
CMG 410 Concrete, Steel and Wood Design & Construction – 3 credit hours. Design and construction of concrete, steel and wood
structures. Principles and fundamental design procedures for concrete, steel, wood beams, columns, slabs, and footings.
Gain experience working with the building codes for designing, detailing and construction of structural members.
Prerequisites: CMG 218. Corequisites: CMG 301.
CMG 420 Internship – 3 credit hours. Cooperative education/internship in construction management provides practical, on-the-job
experience in blueprint reading, material takeoffs, estimating, scheduling, construction safety, equipment management,
construction management, and project planning. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
CMG 430 Advanced Construction Cost Estimating – 3 credit hours. Examines cost estimating as a key process in planning,
designing and constructing buildings. Topics include the analysis of the elements of cost estimating; database
development and management, productivity, unit costs, quantity surveys and pricing, and the application of these tools in
business situations; marketing, sales, bidding, negotiating, value engineering, cost control, claims management and cost
history. Computerization is evaluated as an enhancement to the process. Prerequisites: CMG 250.
CMG 450 Construction Codes & Quality Control – 3 credit hours. Issues of Quality Assurance and Quality Control (QA/QC) in the
construction process. The constructors' roles in ensuring quality are analyzed. Interpretation of building code
requirements, assessment of the utilization of QA/QC and its impact on project quality, cost, schedule, productivity, and
safety are examined. Prerequisites: CMG 301, CMG 410.
CMG 460 Capstone Project Phase I – 2 credit hours. This capstone course is designed to provide instruction in the successful
analysis of a construction-related project. Coordination with the CM course faculty is required to propose, design and
implement a project that will analyze, integrate, and synthesize concepts and knowledge from previous CM and related
course work. Independent research will be performed to develop projects in preparation for a formal final presentation
for the CM course faculty, selected other college professors, and participating industry professionals. Prerequisites:
Senior standing or instructor consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Construction Management program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
CMG 461 Capstone Project Phase II – 2 credit hours. A continuation of CMG 460 Capstone Project Phase I. Prerequisite: CMG
460.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Chemistry program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
Communications Media
COMM 101 Theater Appreciation – 3 credit hours. An introductory course that examines the history and principles of theater art and
dramatic performance from prehistory through contemporary and emerging media. Key texts and authors from
significant historical periods will be examined as well as critical theories and performance analysis. Prerequisites: None.
COMM 110 Film Appreciation – 3 credit hours. A course introducing the aesthetics of film through screening and discussions of
films from various eras, diverse cultures and global film centers. Prerequisites: None.
COMM 201 Introduction to Mass Media – 3 credit hours. A course examining the historical, technical, aesthetic, cultural, sociopolitical and commercial aspects of mass media, with special emphasis on contemporary visual and digital media and the
career opportunities that these offer. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 244 ~
COMM 202 Fundamentals of Television Production – 3 credit hours. Primarily a laboratory course in the development of TV
programs. Study areas include TV equipment, camera operations, optics and lenses used in TV production, set
development and construction and audio reproduction. Prerequisites: COMM 201.
COMM 205 Public Speaking for the Communication Arts Professional – 3 credit hours. A specialized course focusing on developing
the speaking and communication skills for the professional in broadcasting, film and video, theatre, and emerging media.
The student will focus on career-oriented communications such as theatre and video audition techniques (and the
differences between the two); professional job interview strategies; media presentations; and “the pitch.” Verbal and
nonverbal communications will be incorporated as well as the seamless incorporation of electronic media into spoken
presentations. Topics covered will be relevant to both performing and production-oriented professionals. Prerequisites:
ENG 102.
COMM 211 Broadcast Law and Regulations – 3 credit hours. Regulations governing broadcasting, the responsibility for
programming decision, standards and responsibilities of public communications in telecommunications, and laws
relating to the press and to government regulation of broadcasting. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
COMM 212 Writing for Broadcasting – 3 credit hours. The fundamentals of writing and adapting literature for television and radio.
Prerequisites: ENG 102.
COMM 213 Digital Broadcasting – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to bridge the knowledge gap between the content provider
and the IT specialist in the new digital broadcasting age. The course examines the origins of HDTV, current trends and
the future of digital broadcasting. Prerequisites: COMM 202.
COMM 214 Careers in Media Arts – 3 credit hours. A course that examines potential careers in broadcasting, film, video, theatre, and
emerging media. Topics covered will be relevant to the performance, production, and operations professional.
Prerequisites: None.
COMM 215 Voice and Diction – 3 credit hours. Voice training through exercises in voice production, elements of tone, and
articulation of speech sounds. Practical experiences will be offered in announcing, news casting, interviews, special
events, and effective speech. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
COMM 216 Oral Interpretation – 3 credit hours. A course stressing literary interpretation: clarity through understanding of the
content, unity through grasps of the rhythm, interest through appreciation of the dramatic movement, and color through
realization of the mood. Advanced experiences will be offered in interpretation of literary works, announcing,
interviewing, and news casting. Prerequisites: COMM 215.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
COMM 217 Discussion for Television – 3 credit hours. Emphasis on contemporary theories on interpersonal and small group
communication and especially on techniques for argumentation, interview, and panel discussion for TV. Prerequisites:
None.
COMM 218 Non-linear Editing – 3 credit hours. This course examines video editing and finishing physically and conceptually.
Special attention is given to the reasoning behind the edit, the physical cut and the finished presentation. The students
will complete a five-minute feature. Prerequisites: COMM 202.
COMM 301 Film - Screenwriting – 3 credit hours. The first course in a year-long film sequence focuses on developing a final script
with an emphasis on characterization, plotting, target audience, messages and industry-standard script formats using
software like Final Draft and MovieMagic. Prerequisites: None.
COMM 302 Film - Production – 3 credit hours. An introduction to film-making equipment and scripting. Each student will be
required to write, produce, budget, edit, and direct a film project. Prerequisites: COMM 301.
COMM 304 Advanced Television Production – 3 credit hours. Laboratory experience in the development of various types of TV
production. Students will be required to write, produce, budget, and direct a TV program of considerable length in a
category other than drama. Program idea and design will be emphasized. Prerequisites: COMM 202.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 245 ~
COMM 309 Sports Broadcasting – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to the emerging aspects of play-byplay, reporting, TV and radio production. Importance will be given to color commentary, mobile communications, instudio and field production of sports broadcasting. An emphasis will be placed on practical experience that will result
through productions broadcast on the media outlets of WJAB-TV and WJAB 90.9 FM.
COMM 310 Crisis Communications – 3 credit hours. Communication is the key to the success of disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery. Accurate information disseminated to the public, elected officials, community leaders and the
media allows for reducing risk, saving lives and property and speeds recovery. The Crisis Communications course is an
in-depth look at managing communication messages. It will provide a look at best practices on the process and
requirements to control messages and protect brands and institutions. Case studies focusing on the numerous types of
crises will include natural disasters (Hurricane Katrina & Harvey), terrorism (9/11, Sandy Hook Elementary, Mandalay
Bay Hotel), accidents (BP Oil Spill), crime (Penn State University), misguided executive media interviews (Lulumon),
and education (University of Michigan).
COMM 311 Advertising for Radio and Television – 3 credit hours. Application of the principles of advertising to the broadcast
media. Emphasis will be placed on techniques of writing and production of advertisement. Prerequisites: 15 semester
hours in COMM.
COMM 313 The Black Press – 3 credit hours. The course is designed to provide an introduction to the history of the Black Press
which was essential during the abolition movement, connected African Americans beyond their individual communities
during the Civil Rights era and covered stories that were not featured in the mainstream press. It will look at the impact
of the Black Press from Russwurm and Cornish’s Freedom Journal in 1827 through the Civil Rights era. In addition, it
will examine black newspapers and magazines as cultural depositories that recorded philosophical debates, problems,
solutions and developments of the African American community in the united States. Pioneers in the industry (Alice
Dunnigan, Ethel Payne, John Johnson, Bob Johnson, Cathy Hughes, April Ryan, etc.) will also be introduced.
COMM 321 News and Documentary Techniques – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of news reporting for all news media, the gathering
and writing of news, study of news departments, responsibility to the public affairs programming, and news editing.
Prerequisites: 15 semester hours in COMM.
COMM 401 Practicum I – 3 credit hours. Training in the operation of audio and video equipment using the facilities of the AAMU
Telecommunications Center and other facilities, based on student interest. Prerequisites: 15 semester hours in COMM.
COMM 402 Practicum II – 3 credit hours. Additional training in the Telecommunications Center or other appropriate centers.
Prerequisites: 15 semester hours in COMM.
COMM 403 Acting for Television and Film I – 3 credit hours. An exploration of the principles and theories of dramatic performance
expressed through contemporary entertainment media. Practical experience in acting for television will be offered.
Prerequisites: None.
COMM 404 Acting for Television and Film II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of COMM 403. Prerequisites: COMM 403.
COMM 405 Intro to Directing – 3 credit hours. Training in the fundaments of directing performers. The course will examine script
analysis and interpretation, interaction with designers, the language and techniques of stage direction, and how those
applications are transferred to working with performers in all media. Prerequisites: COMM 403.
COMM 406 Advanced Directing – 3 credit hours. An interactive and project-oriented course which adapts the principles of directing
into electronic media. The student will focus on the creation of several directorial projects including creation and
adaptation of texts for performance and direction of actors to achieve the desired vision. Prerequisites: COMM 405.
COMM 411 Special Topics in Broadcasting – 3 credit hours. The history, significance, potentialities, current trends, and utilization in
the broadcast medium. Emphasis will also be placed on broadcast economics and station management. Prerequisites: 15
semester hours in COMM.
COMM 431 Special Topics in Film – 3 credit hours. Visual aspects of television and film, with emphasis on basic principles of
designing, techniques of lighting, and practices in television and film studio operations, as well as sound motion picture
production. Prerequisites: 15 semester hours in COMM.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 246 ~
COMM 441 Special Topics in Speech and Drama – 3 credit hours. Both history and practice in the art of advocacy involving analysis,
arrangement, and presentation of arguments for the purpose of decision making and social control. Experiences in
developing scripts for public performance will be required. Prerequisites: 15 semester hours in COMM.
Criminal Justice
CRJ 250 Introduction to Criminal Justice – 3 credit hours. A survey of the entire American criminal justice process and systems
including criminal laws, police subsystem, judicial subsystem, and correctional subsystem. Issues in America’s criminal
justice system will be integrated into the coverage. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 252 Criminal Law – 3 credit hours. Focuses on common law and statutory law crimes, the penal code, elements defining
crimes and penalties, defenses to criminal accusations, and definitions and distinctions between criminal and civil law.
Prerequisites: CRJ 250.
CRJ 253 (SOC 253) Deviant Behavior – 3 credit hours. A study of processes by which some members of society become deviant.
Readings will deal with particular forms of deviance such as mental illness, suicides, prostitution, use of drugs, riots,
vice, and white collar crime in an effort to arrive at a general theory of the causes of deviance. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 254 Introduction to Corrections – 3 credit hours. An examination of the origin and current status of various aspects of the
correctional system including jails, prisons, community-based correctional programs and the philosophies of punishment
and justice. Problems and issues associated with the correctional system will be discussed. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 265 (PSC 265/SOC 265) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Introduction to basic and essential statistical concepts
introduced and their application to behavior measurements. Descriptive tools of central tendency, variability, and
standard scores are considered, as well as correlation and basic inferential tools of the t-test and simple analysis of
variance. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 323 (SOC 323) Juvenile Justice – 3 credit hours. An examination of the nature and causes of juvenile delinquency. The
course also reviews the juvenile justice system and programs for treatment, control and prevention of juvenile
delinquency. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 336 (SOC 336/PSC 336) Black Lives Matter – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the nature, causes, development, forms, functions,
and outcome of recent social movements are analyzed. Theories about social movements as a variation of collective
behavior are included. Prerequisites: SOC 351/CRJ 351.
CRJ 351 (SOC 351) Criminology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the field of criminology. Specifically, the course covers the
nature of crime, the causes of criminal behavior and the reactions to crime. Theories of crime causation are also
discussed. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 355 Criminal Justice Administration – 3 credit hours. An analysis of administration and management in a variety of criminal
justice settings and of their related problems and issues. Major topics include the unique nature of criminal justice
organizations, work motivation, job design, communications, leadership or management styles, management by
objectives, managing employee performance, organizational behavioral modification, decision making, and
organizational change and development. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 356 Police Administration – 3 credit hours. Organization and function of law enforcement agencies are covered. Police
problems and practices are evaluated. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 357 Probation and Parole – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the history, administration, and various components/processes
of probation and parole, such as pre-sentence investigation, classification, supervision of probationers, conditions of
probation, and revocation hearings. Issues in probation and parole are also discussed. Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Criminal Justice – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in
the form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience
related to the student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development
Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The
student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to
receive ELO course credit. Prerequisites: CRJ 250.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 247 ~
CRJ 443 (PSC 443/SOC 443) Social Research – 3 credit hours. An introduction to sociological research including the principles
of research design, and the collection, analysis, and reporting of data through actual field experience. Prerequisites:
None.
CRJ 448 (SOC 448) Social Legislation for Crime and Social Policy – 3 credit hours. A survey of the development, philosophy,
and changes in American social legislation and of its impact upon contemporary life. The last 30 years are stressed.
Prerequisites: None.
CRJ 450 Criminal Procedures – 3 credit hours. Expands on the concepts presented in CRJ 252, Criminal Law, emphasizing
criminal procedure, including the laws of arrest and search and seizure, the rights of the accused; and the roles of the
prosecutor, judge, jury and defense counsel in the judicial process. Prerequisites: CRJ 252.
CRJ 451 Rules of Evidence in Criminal Cases – 3 credit hours. Consideration of the foundation and rationale of rules of evidence
in criminal cases as well as rules of evidence pertaining to the various types of evidence, such as testimony of witnesses,
judicial notice, hearsay, confession, physical evidence, etc. Prerequisites: None.
Computer Science
CS 101 Fundamentals of Computer and Information Systems – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to
fundamentals of computer science and technologies. Topics will cover brief history of computer and the information age,
word processing, INTERNET access, operating system, computer structure, electronic storage, database fundamentals,
computer network. Impact of computers on the individual and society and application of computer in different areas are
also introduced. Prerequisites: None.
CS 102 Introduction to Programming I – 3 credit hours. This course concentrates on the process of computer problem solving.
The idea of an algorithm is covered and flow charting skills are taught as a means of logical problem solving. The core
elements of high level language are also taught. The student is expected to solve routine programming problems.
Prerequisites: None.
CS 104 Introduction to Computers & Ethics – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to focus on fundamentals of computer
science, computer ethics and introduce fundamentals and core concepts of programming using Python. Topics included
are basics of computer hardware and software, computer applications, the impact of computers on the individual and
society, ethical principles, concepts of programming and problem solving through the use of Python scripting language.
This includes fundamental knowledge of data structure and algorithms, and use of computers in problem solving using
Python. Prerequisites: None.
CS 109 Introduction to Programming II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of the subject matter of CS 102. More advanced
programming concepts are covered here. Topics include control structures, arrays, procedures, files, and recursion.
Several programming exercises are assigned. Prerequisites: CS 102 with a C or better.
CS 203 Discrete Structures – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the use of formal mathematical structures to represent problems and
computational processes. Develop an understanding of how to read, understand, and construct mathematical proofs and
theorems. Introduce various problem-solving strategies such as thinking algorithmically (iterative and recursive) to
solving problems in computing applications. Topics covered include (1) functions, relations, and sets, (2) basic logic, (3)
proof techniques, (4) basics of counting, (5) graphs and trees, and (6) number systems. Prerequisites: CS 102 with a C or
better.
CS 206 Visual Programming I – 3 credit hours. This course introduces fundamental concepts of visual programming languages
such as Visual Basic, Visual C#, or Visual Java. Emphasis will be placed on solving real world problems. Students will
be asked to design and code using these languages in an efficient manner. Prerequisites: CS 102 with a C or better.
CS 209 Introduction to Digital Logic Design – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce the logic design concepts for
both combinatorial and sequential circuits. The binary number systems, the Boolean algebra, concepts of optimization of
logic equations using various methods are covered in depth. Various types of integrated systems and components such as
flip-flops, registers, counters are covered. Students will learn the basics as well as implementation skills upon completion
of this course. Prerequisites: CS 203 with a C or better.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 248 ~
CS 215 Data Structures – 3 credit hours. This course concentrates on the ways data can be organized and accessed. The idea of
abstract data types is introduced and real data structures such as lists, linked lists, record, stacks, trees, and graphs are
explained in terms of their basic structure and in the ways that they can be used in practical programming problems.
Several programming assignments are required. Prerequisites: CS 109 or EE 109 with a C or better.
CS 303L Assembly Language – 3 credit hours. The architecture and organization of a selected machine will be discussed in this
class. The assembly language of this machine will be taught and students will learn the basics of addressing modes,
representation of data control structures, memory organization, and the assembly/relocation process. Programming
assignments will allow the student to become proficient in the assembly language. Prerequisites: CS 109, CS 203.
CS 304 Introduction to Web Programming – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce undergraduate students to the
basic concepts of the World Wide Web (HTTP, HTML, browser software), languages and techniques used for web
programming (for example: Perl, Java, CGI), data transfer over the web (associated tools and techniques), and the tools
available in the web environment. By the end of the course the students are expected to learn programming in HTML,
Perl and to be able to develop interactive web pages and applications. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
CS 305 Numerical Methods – 3 credit hours. This course will investigate the use of several fundamental algorithms to solve
mathematical problems common to science and engineering applications. Methods illustrated will include numerical
interpolation, integration, and the solution of differential equations. Programming assignments will be made to illustrate
the numerical concepts. Prerequisites: (MTH 126 or MTH 146) and CS 109 with a C or better.
CS 306 Visual Programming II – 3 credit hours. This undergraduate course is designed to introduce advanced visual
programming skills in Java platform. The main topics include Java network programming (RMI, servlets, socket
programming), JDBC, Java Beans and EJBs, media and Java 2-D graphics. Students will learn to use Java technologies
in the real world and write numerous, nontrivial programs throughout the semester to demonstrate mastery of the
concepts discussed in the classroom. Prerequisites: CS 206 with a C or better.
CS 309 Computer Graphics – 3 credit hours. Computer Graphics covers the means of visually displaying data. Hardware
graphics systems are discussed, as well as the data structures and software techniques used in setting up graphical
displays. Prerequisites: CS 215, MTH 237.
CS 311 Introduction to Simulation – 3 credit hours. The basics of simulating real world situations with the computer form the
content of this course. Mathematical modeling is discussed; elements of probability and statistics, Monte Carlo sampling,
and uses of simulation languages are also undertaken. Programming assignments are made to illustrate these basic
concepts. Prerequisites: CS 215.
CS 314 Advanced Programming – 3 credit hours. Introduces more advanced elements of programming, such as user interface
design, event driven programming, object-oriented programming, web-based programming, computer graphics, and
database access. Use of a development environment to design, code, test, and debug advanced programs, including
multi-file source projects. Also provide the opportunity for students to work as teams on application projects. Several
programming assignments are required. Microsoft Visual Studio, C#, and the .NET Framework will be the programming
environment for this semester. Prerequisites: CS 109, CS 206.
CS 315 Introduction to Game Programming – 3 credit hours. The course is designed to introduce undergraduate students to the
basic concepts of game design and development, hands-on exposure to the different techniques used for game
programming, implementation on different target devices/platforms using the available tools and programming
languages such as java, C# in the game environment. By the end of the course the students are expected to learn the
concepts of game design, development and implementation using different programming languages/tools available.
Prerequisites: CS 215.
CS 320 Introduction to Multimedia Authoring – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the basic concepts of computer-based
multimedia production. Topics included are essentials of interactive multimedia authoring, design planning of a
multimedia production, building blocks for multimedia productions (text, graphics, sound and video), introduction to
HyperCard and HyperCard objects (buttons, fields, card, background), use of Hypertalk programming language, and
introduction to the Authorware authoring tool. Each student is required to complete a semester project. Prerequisites:
Junior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 249 ~
CS 321 Principles of Information Security – 3 credit hours. Introduce students to the principles of information security and
assurance as applied to computer networks. This course includes the foundation for understanding the key issues
associated with protecting information security assets, determining levels of protection and response to security
incidents, and designing a consistent, reasonable information system with appropriate intrusion detection and reporting
features. Students will be exposed to the spectrum of security activities, methods, tools, and procedures. Coverage will
include inspection and protection of information assets, identification of appropriate pre/post-incident procedures, and
technical/managerial responses. Prerequisites: CS 104 with a C or better.
CS 328 Object Oriented Design with UML – 3 credit hours. This course introduces students to UML (Unified Modeling
Language) and its comprehensive notation for communicating the requirements, architecture, implementation,
deployment, and states of a system. The students will learn both the concepts and hands-on skills of Object Oriented
Analysis and Design using UML. The course also deals with the implementation of the UML design in a programming
language. Prerequisites: CS 109 or CS 206.
CS 330 Computers in Society – 3 credit hours. This course examines computing as a social process with emphasis on ethical
issues and the social impact of computerization on local and global organizations. Prerequisites: CS 104.
CS 381 Computer Organization – 3 credit hours. The primary hardware and software components of a computer system are
addressed in this course. Topics covered include digital logic and data representation, computer architecture and
organization, interfacing and I/O strategies, memory architecture, functional organization, multiprocessing, performance
enhancements, distributed architectures, devices, and directions in computing. The organization of the CPU, main
memory, interrupt structure, and addressing techniques as well as assemblers and linker/loaders are also taught.
Prerequisites: CS 209 with a C or better.
CS 384 Operating Systems – 3 credit hours. The use of the operating system and other software systems is the core content of
this course. Topics include tasking and processes, scheduling, task coordination, device management, file systems,
security, and networking. Prerequisites: Junior standing, CS 209, CS 215.
CS 386 Cryptography – 3 credit hours. The objective of this course is to learn the concepts of cryptography, its applications and
importance in cyber security. The course will cover the fundamental concepts of cryptography including historical
background, number theory, encryption, authentication, public key cryptography, digital signatures and some modern
cryptography principles. Prerequisites: CS 203, CS 215.
CS 389 Programming in Robotics Systems – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce the programming concepts
involved with autonomous robotics systems. The educational version and off-the-shelf robot kits will be provided and
used for student projects and assignments. Students will design a simple robotic platform to meet specific goals. A
common platform is used as practice environment for students to learn programming skills in robotics systems.
Prerequisites: CS 109 or CS 206 with a C or better.
CS 401 Software Engineering – 3 credit hours. This course covers the ideas involved in large scale programming design. The
software life cycle is covered along with design specifications, verification and validation, and the use of various
supporting CASE tools. The student is expected to design and document a software system of some kind and may be
asked to code some of the design. Prerequisites: Senior standing, CS 215, CS 314.
CS 403 Senior Problems – 3 credit hours. During this course, the student is expected to code a single, meaningful project begun
earlier in CS 401 and present the results of this project in class. This project must meet set standards of design and
documentation. Topics of professional ethics and responsibilities will also be discussed. Prerequisites: CS 401 with a C
or better.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Computer Science program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
CS 405 LINUX with Application Programming – 3 credit hours. This course deals with advanced skills related to Linux
operating systems, programming environments, interfaces, programming tools, and utilities. This course will offer
detailed programming/scripting skills using different shells, viz., Bourne, C Shell, Bash, tcsh, Perl, etc. In this course, the
students will learn Linux virtualization and emulation, GNU tools, sockets programming. Prerequisites: CS 314, CS 384.
CS 408 Wireless Computing – 3 credit hours. Advances and new applications in the expanding field of telecommunications and
wireless computing and networks are investigated. Methodologies and tools for network planning, implementation, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 250 ~
management, maintenance, and security are described. Topics include asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), synchronous
optical network/synchronous digital hierarchy (SONET/SDH), Gigabit Ethernet, the Open Systems Interconnection
(OSI), Reference Model, transmission media, second-generation and third generation wireless networks, network
protocols, and networking performance. Trends in standardization, internet working, and the development of optical
networks; WLANs (Wireless Local Area Networks), WMANs (Wireless Metropolitan Networks) and WWANs
(Wireless Wide Area Networks) and residential networking solutions that feature cable, DSL (Digital Subscriber Line),
Power line and satellite technologies are considered. Prerequisites: CS 384 with a C or better.
CS 409 Introduction to Digital Image Processing – 3 credit hours. Focus on the fundamental concepts of image processing and
computer vision; it’s principles in signal processing, the theory of feature extraction and image analysis, its relation to
human vision and technology for implementation. Introduce students to MATLAB image processing toolbox. Students
will understand how to acquire and process images, the nature and operation of basic image processing algorithms and
their basis. Prerequisites: Senior standing, CS 215.
CS 410 Seminar – 3 credit hours. This course is intended to enhance students’ overall skills towards professional development.
This includes writing and presenting technical papers utilizing technical digital/library resources, attending lectures from
experts in the industry, visiting computer science related industries. The students will also get the opportunity to work in
a team on application projects. The topics will be based on current trends in the industry. Prerequisites: CS 314 and CS
381 with a C or better.
CS 412 (CS 519) Cloud Computing – 3 credit hours. The cloud computing course is designed to introduce the concepts and
capabilities across various cloud service models including infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platforms as a Service
(PaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS) and Business Process as a Service (BPaaS). This course includes various cloud
architecture and cloud storage, data center design issues, security and privacy issues, application on commercial cloud
computing platforms, and building mobile apps with a cloud-based backend. A variety of real-life case studies and many
existing commercial cloud-based tools will be discussed. Prerequisites: CS 215.
CS 413 (CS 520) Introduction to Data Science – 3 credit hours. This course teaches fundamental concepts and techniques in data
science and big data analytics. Students will learn concepts, techniques and tools they need to deal with various facets of
data science practice, including data collection and integration, exploratory data analysis, predictive modeling,
descriptive modeling, data product creation, evaluation, and effective communication. The emphasis will be placed on
integration and synthesis of concepts and their application to solving problems. Prerequisites: CS 215 and senior
standing.
CS 414 Forensic Computing – 3 credit hours. The course introduces the undergraduate students to the study of computer
forensics, including the concepts, tools and techniques necessary for identification, retrieval, preservation, analysis and
documentation of information from electronic media in matters of suspected unauthorized access to confidential
information, intellectual property crimes, fraud, piracy, industrial espionage, decryption, destruction of information, etc.
The course will incorporate demonstrations and laboratory exercises to reinforce practical applications of course
instruction. Prerequisites: CS 384.
CS 421 Computer Security – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce undergraduate students to the basic concepts of
computer security. The students will learn the tools and techniques that can monitor the system for activities by
unwanted programs such as malware, adware, viruses, worms, trojans, etc. By the end of the course the students are
expected to learn to use available tools as well as develop and implement programs using different programming
languages, for computer security. Prerequisites: CS 384.
CS 425 Theory of Algorithms – 3 credit hours. Formal properties of algorithms are covered here. The use of big O notation is
covered, along with its use in algorithm analysis. Other topics include recursion, finite automata, and NP complete
problems. Examples of several routine algorithms such as searching and sorting are done and assigned as programming
projects. Prerequisites: CS 215, MTH 126.
CS 435 Introduction to Bioinformatics – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to the fast emerging field of
Bioinformatics that demands/consists of knowledge mainly from the areas of biology and computer science. The main
objectives of this course are to prepare the students to analyze the vast biomolecular data and to develop necessary tools
to analyze. Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 251 ~
CS 440 Programming Languages – 3 credit hours. In this course, comparisons are made between several modern programming
languages. Language syntax, use, and structure are covered. Programming assignments in these languages are made.
Prerequisites: CS 314.
CS 450 Artificial Intelligence – 3 credit hours. This is an introduction to the uses and techniques of artificial intelligence. Topics
covered include knowledge representation, natural languages, machine learning, vision, and expert systems.
Programming projects will be assigned. Prerequisites: CS 215 with a C or better.
CS 483 Compilers – 3 credit hours. This course is a study of formal grammars, syntactic and semantic analysis, code generation,
and other topics necessary to understand how compilers translate high-level languages into machine form. Programming
projects are assigned. Prerequisites: Senior standing, CS 215.
CS 484 Internship – 3 credit hours. The computer science internship program gives senior level undergraduates an opportunity to
gain valuable, practical experience in the professional work environment. An internship consists of approved part-time
employment over one semester with cooperation between the student’s advisor and the employer. Prerequisites: CS 314
with a C or better or instructor consent.
CS 485 Introductions to Data Communications and Networks – 3 credit hours. This is a course covering data communications
concepts and systems, communications networks, communication processors, network protocol, and local area networks.
Prerequisites: CS 381 with a C or better.
CS 488 Database Systems – 3 credit hours. A study of the basic issues in database design, including database interfaces, data
structures used the relational model, and query languages. A commercially available database package will be used to
give students exposure to these concepts. Prerequisites: CS 215.
CS 490 High Performance Computing – 3 credit hours. This course serves as an introduction to the areas of parallel and
structured computers. The course covers distributed computers in networks, multiprocessors, and pipelines. Architectural
considerations, algorithm design, and performance measures are also covered. Prerequisites: CS 215 and CS 381 with a
C or better.
Communicative Sciences & Disorders
CSD 202 Survey of Communication Disorders – 3 credit hours. A broad survey of the field of speech-language pathology and
audiology. Prerequisites: GPA of 2.5 or higher and CSD advisor consent.
CSD 203 Phonetics – 3 credit hours. A study of speech sounds in the English language and development of skills using the
International Phonetic Alphabet. Prerequisites: GPA of 2.5 or higher and CSD advisor consent.
CSD 204 Anatomy and Physiology of Speech Mechanism – 3 credit hours. A study of the structure and functioning of organs,
muscles, and nerves of speech and the mechanisms involved in normal speech and language production. Prerequisites:
GPA of 2.5 or higher and CSD advisor consent.
CSD 205 Language Development – 3 credit hours. A course emphasizing the study of normal language development with
emphasis on the development of the phonological, syntactic, and semantic systems in children. Prerequisites: CSD
advisor consent.
CSD 207 Speech and Hearing Science – 2 credit hours. An overview of the physiology, acoustics, and perception of speech.
Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 215 Articulation Disorders and Phonological Disorders – 3 credit hours. Professional terminology, classifying problems,
etiologies, appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, and associated problems. Prerequisites: CSD advisor
consent.
CSD 307 Principles of Diagnostic Assessment in Communication Disorders – 3 credit hours. Methods of classifying
communication disorders for assessment purposes. Utilization of diagnostic tests, test interpretation, and report writing
of test results on speech and language disorders. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 308 Basic Audiology – 3 credit hours. A study of the anatomy and physiology of the ear, description of types of hearing
losses, and basic tests in pure tone and speech audiometry. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 252 ~
CSD 310 Clinical Procedures in CSD – 3 credit hours. A course in the construction of therapy plans, clinical methods, materials,
and applications of remedial techniques for communication disorders. Students will begin to accrue observation hours as
required by ASHA. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 312 Language Intervention and Communication Skills for the Moderately and Severely Disabled Individual – 3 credit hours.
A course involving the study of language remediation and intervention for developing communication skills in severely
and profoundly disabled individuals. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 321 Supervised Clinical Practicum I – 3 credit hours. Clinical experiences with children and adults who have communication
disorders. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 323 Communication for the Hearing Impaired – 3 credit hours. A study of the theories and methods of working with the
hearing impaired. Emphasis will be placed on communication disabilities related to hearing losses. Prerequisites: CSD
advisor consent.
CSD 324 Language, Literacy and Learning – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on developing literacy (speaking, listening,
reading, writing, and viewing) in young children. Emphasis is on the integration of all dimensions of literacy. Learning
and teaching theories will be integrated with practical applications. Theories, materials, and methods that develop
literacy in developmentally appropriate environments from preschool through grade two will be discussed. Family
involvement; cultural and linguistic differences; English language learners; integrating play, language, and literacy;
performance assessments; and adaptations for special needs children are explored. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 325 Voice and Articulation – 3 credit hours. A course emphasizing the physiology and scientific aspects of the speech
production process with emphasis on cultural differences in speaking and voice problems. Prerequisites: CSD advisor
consent.
CSD 332 Augmentative and Alternative Communication – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to increase the student’s
awareness and functional knowledge of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices. AAC is the
supplementation and/or replacement of natural speech and/or writing using aided and/or unaided symbols (e.g.,
Blissymbols, finger spelling, gestures, ideographs, logographs, manual signs, pictographs) and the related means of
selection and transmission of such symbols. This course offers a survey of the issues that address the individual needs
and requirements of those that utilize AAC devices. The student will be exposed to those issues that must be addressed in
order to provide appropriate and efficacious services. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 406 Supervised Clinical Practicum II – 3 credit hours. Clinical experience with children and adults who have communication
disorders. Enrollment limited. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 414 Advanced Speech Pathology – 3 credit hours. A study of professional terminology, classification, etiologies,
symptomologies, and appropriate therapy procedures used with individuals having specific communication disorders.
Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 415 Foundations of Counseling in CSD – 3 credit hours. This course involves the discussion and application of positive
communication and interaction with patients and caregivers to promote and enhance the therapeutic process.
Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 417 Methods and Materials in Communicative Disorders – 3 credit hours. A study of methods and materials for speechlanguage pathologists including coordination, planning, professional relationships and program structure. Current
materials for communication disorders are discussed and utilized. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 421 Multicultural Issues in Communicative Disorders – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to increase the student’s
awareness of the cultural differences and practices of various ethnic and racial groups. This course offers a survey of the
issues that address the individual and collective differences that must be considered in order to provide appropriate and
efficacious services. Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 423 Speech and Language Problems in the Aged – 3 credit hours. This course is intended to serve as a source for
understanding normal communication changes, communication disorders, and service delivery options from a
gerontological perspective. This course will explore the concept of understanding and developing strategies for 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 253 ~
management of age-related communication deficits. Information is presented within the context of a unified model of
communicative functioning in the elderly. Emphasis will be placed on key issues, vocabulary associated with the
management of the impaired elderly, and topics of particular interest in considering communicative behavior.
Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
CSD 425 Senior Seminar – 3 credit hours. This course involves the discussion of current trends and topics in the field of
communicative sciences and disorders. Topics will include, but are not limited to, genomics and ethical practices.
Prerequisites: CSD advisor consent.
Cooperative Work Experience
CWE 220 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
CWE 230 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
CWE 320 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
CWE 330 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
CWE 420 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
CWE 430 Cooperative Work Experience – 3 credit hours. Each course is on-the-job work experience that provides the student an
opportunity to apply classroom facts, theories, and principles to practical work situations.
Pre-Elementary & Elementary Education
ECE 300 Expressive Arts – 3 credit hours. A course designed to give candidates an understanding of the use of art and music are
used in the classroom to aid student’s artistic expressions. Special emphasis is given to the use of art and music to
enhance the physical and motor growth and development of all young children. The content of this course is designed so
that candidates are given information and resources about primary students (P-3) and intermediate students (4-6).
Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 301 Materials and Methods of Teaching Language Arts – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide candidates with
experiences that give them knowledge, skills, and dispositions about methods and materials related to language arts with
special emphasis on listening, handwriting, reading, speaking, and children’s literature. Emphasis will also be placed on
writing compositions. The content of this course is planned around primary students (P-3) and intermediate students (4-
6). A practicum is required. Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 302 Materials and Methods of Teaching Social Studies – 3 credit hours. Emphasis on the knowledge, skills, and dispositions
needed by candidates to become effective classroom social studies teachers. The course will underscore the content
taught to primary students (P-3) and intermediate students (4-6). Among topics, the instruction will focus on cooperative
learning, multicultural concerns, current issues, inquiry methods and developing map and globe concepts. A practicum is
required. Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 303 Materials and Methods of Teaching Science & Health – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to enable pre-service
teacher candidates to develop the knowledge, attitude, and skill necessary to teach science and health effectively related
to the development of early childhood and elementary students. The curriculum topics emphasized in this course will
include process of science and scientific inquiry, construction of science knowledge, science teaching strategies, and
planning for instruction. This course provides the opportunities to refine teaching skills in the planning, implementation,
and evaluation of science lessons and units of instruction. Alabama Math, Science, and Technology Initiative (AMSTI)
training is embedded in this course. Preservice teacher candidates will receive AMSTI year one certification upon
completion of the online Note Book training and the course. A practicum is required. Prerequisites: Admission to
Educator Preparation Program
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 254 ~
ECE 304 Teaching Reading to Young Children – 3 credit hours. A course providing an in-depth study of early literacy
development and word identification strategies that will include methods of assessment and instruction in phonemic
awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and text comprehension. Major approaches to reading instruction
developmentally appropriate for young children will be investigated. A practicum is required. Prerequisites: Admission
to Teacher Education.
ECE 305 Materials and Methods of Teaching Mathematics – 3 credit hours (9 clock hours per week). A course designed to provide
experiences of mathematics education related to children’s developmental learning of early childhood/elementary
mathematics. There is a strong emphasis on research based instructional strategies, manipulatives, and other materials
useful in teaching content within an intense field experience. Alabama Math Science and Technology Initiative (AMSTI)
training is embedded in this curriculum. Pre-service teacher candidates will receive third grade Year One AMSTI
certification upon successful completion of the course. A practicum is required. Prerequisites: Admission to Educator
Preparation Program.
ECE 404 Problems in Teaching Reading – 3 credit hours. A course involving in-depth study into the reading process with regard
to understanding reading comprehension. Candidates will learn to assess the strengths and weaknesses of readers in order
to plan a program of accelerated instruction. A practicum is required. Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 405 Seminar: Issues and Problems in Teaching – 3 credit hours. An analysis of current trends and problems in teaching.
Subjects of contemporary interest will be explored in depth by students. Attention will be given to possible solutions for
current problems in education. Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 407 Teaching Intermediate Readers – 3 credit hours. In-depth study in and application of the process of reading and reading
instruction, theoretical approaches, instructional strategies, classroom organization, and the formal/informal assessment
of teaching reading in the intermediate grades. Emphases are on acquiring vocabulary, developing comprehension skills,
and refining reading processes by modeling metacognitive strategies that promote reading for meaning in a balanced
literacy program. A practicum is required. Prerequisites: ECE 304 and Admission to Teacher Education.
ECE 412 Children’s Literature – 3 credit hours. A survey course of current and traditional literature applicable to diverse
populations of children. The components of a well-balanced literature program and related audio-visual media are
explored as a means of enriching the basic curriculum and as a source of information and pleasure for children.
Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
Pre-Elementary Education
ECH 300 Introduction to Early Childhood – 3 credit hours. This is an introductory course for Early Childhood Education majors.
The course will focus on the historical and theoretical foundations and current influences on early childhood education,
curricula for young children, planning, and assessing activities that are developmentally appropriate, various kinds of
assessments, guiding behavior, and encouraging parent involvement. Prerequisites: Advisor Approval.
ECH 303 Environments for Learning in Early Childhood Education – 3 credit hours. This course examines the relationship
between a play-based environment and learning in the early childhood classroom. Focus will be placed on planning and
implementing developmentally appropriate experiences to support learning and will incorporate appropriate strategies for
assessing young children. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP and Advisor Approval.
ECH 402 Creating & Implementing Teaching Materials in Early Childhood Education – 3 credit hours. A course which places
emphasis on the designing and laboratory testing of teacher-made materials useful in teaching young children cognitive
and social skills. Prerequisites: Advisor Approval.
ECH 405 Organization and Administration of Early Childhood Education Programs – 3 credit hours. A course addressing the
administration, organization, and supervision of programs for infants and young children. Prerequisites: Admission to
Teacher Education.
ECH 407 Practicum in Groups of Young Children – 3 credit hours. University-supervised practical experiences in working with
young children in an on/off-campus public or private state accredited school, grade levels P-3. Prerequisites: Advisor
Approval.
ECH 411 Teacher Education Workshops – 3 credit hours. Selected topics related to early childhood programs and activities.
Prerequisites: Advisor Approval.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 255 ~
ECH 419 Child, Family and Community – 3 credit hours. This course will address family systems theory and engagement models.
Focus will be given to engaging families in their child’s learning and development and the multiple influences on a
young child’s development. Course content will explore the child as a central focus to the connections between, home,
school and the community. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP, Advisor-Approval, ECH 300.
ECH 495 Internship – 12 credit hours. Fourteen weeks of full-time teaching under the immediate direction of supervising teachers
in off-campus public (or approved private) schools. Upon return to the campus, students share their experiences, discuss
problems, and develop new techniques in a professional seminar. Weekly seminar is required. Prerequisites: Senior
classification; official admission to Teacher Education Program; minimum cumulative average of 2.75, “C” in all
coursework completed, with no grade less than a “C” for professional courses; completion of all coursework in the
program.
Economics
ECO 200 Basic Economics – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamentals of macro- and microeconomics in a market economy;
economic systems; money and banking, economic conditions and government policies. This course is not open to
Business majors. ECO 231 and 232 combined may be substituted for ECO 200. However, ECO 200 cannot be
substituted for ECO 231 or ECO 232 or (ECO 231 and ECO 232 combined). Prerequisites: ENG 102, MTH 110 or
higher.
ECO 231 Principles of Macroeconomics – 3 credit hours. A study of the measurement and determination of GNP and related
measures; money and banking; inflation; unemployment; Keynesian, monetarist and other macroeconomics theories; the
economic role of the government; the U.S. economy; monetary and fiscal policies; economic growth; and international
issues. Prerequisites: MTH 110 or higher.
ECO 232 Principles of Microeconomics – 3 credit hours. Elements of supply and demand; elasticity; consumer behavior; theory of
the firm; production, cost analysis and profit optimization; product markets and market structures; resource markets and
resource allocation; and taxation and government expenditures. Prerequisites: MTH 110 or higher.
ECO 271 Business Statistics I – 3 credit hours. An introduction to descriptive and analytical statistical techniques; collection,
organization and graphical presentation of data; probability theory and probability distributions; elementary estimation
and hypothesis testing; simple linear regression and correlation; time series; and index numbers. Prerequisites: MTH
112.
ECO 272 Business Statistics II – 3 credit hours. Review of probability; normal and t distributions; statistical inference about means
and proportions; inferences about population variances; test of goodness of fit and independence; analysis of variance
and experimental design; time series and index numbers; regression and correlation analysis. Prerequisites: ECO 271 or
equivalent.
ECO 300 Engineering Economics – 3 credit hours. Economic evaluation of private and public projects; time value of money;
compound interest; present and future values; uniform series of costs and benefits; effects of depreciation, inflation and
taxes on the valuation of projects; risk and uncertainty; investment criteria; internal rate of return, net present value and
cost-benefit analysis. Prerequisites: None.
ECO 326 Labor Management Relation – 3 credit hours. Study of the labor union movement, labor management relations,
collective bargaining, and labor legislation. Prerequisites: ECO 200, ECO 231 or ECO 232.
ECO 401 Intermediate Macroeconomics – 3 credit hours. Aggregate economic analyses; measurement and determination of
national income, including the price level, unemployment and economic growth; international aspects of
macroeconomics; fiscal and monetary policies; classical, Keynesian and post-Keynesian theories. Prerequisites: ECO
231.
ECO 402 Intermediate Microeconomics – 3 credit hours. The theories of consumer behavior; production and cost theories;
behavior of the firm in the product and resource markets under different types market structures; supply and demand;
elasticity; resource allocation; analysis of the impact of economic policies on firms and industries, including taxation,
quotas and price fixing; welfare economic. Prerequisites: ECO 232.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 256 ~
ECO 411 Contemporary Issues in Economics – 3 credit hours. Current economic problems and issues such as the debt and the
deficit, health care, environmental economics, crisis in financial institutions, social security, and the U. S. trade deficit.
Prerequisites: ECO 231.
ECO 413 Money and Banking – 3 credit hours. The monetary system; functions, properties and types of money; evolution of
money, commercial banks and other depository institutions; origins and current role of the Federal Reserve System and
other public monetary institutions; measurement and control of the stock of money; the role of money in the macroeconomy; monetary policy. Prerequisites: ECO 231.
ECO 414 Managerial Economics – 3 credit hours. Application of economic concepts to business decision-making; analysis and
forecasting of demand; cost analysis; pricing behavior; and optimizing techniques. Prerequisites: ECO 232.
ECO 415 Environmental Economics – 3 credit hours. Economic analysis of environmental issues, problem, and solution; analysis
of benefits and costs of improving the environment; the global dimensions of the environmental problems resulting from
resource extraction and utilization and industrial production. Prerequisites: ECO 200 or ECO 232.
ECO 433 Investment in Practice – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
ECO 434 Investment in Practice – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
ECO 435 Investment in Practice – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
ECO 444 Public Sector Economics – 3 credit hours. Effects of spending public funds, collecting taxes and other revenues;
government borrowing and debt payment; government expenditures, revenues, and public credit. Prerequisites: ECO 200
or ECO 231.
ECO 446 International Trade and Policy – 3 credit hours. Principles underlying international trade; free trade and the effects of
barriers to trade; the effects of mobility of factors of production; macroeconomics of international exchange of goods,
services, and financial assets. Prerequisites: ECO 231.
ECO 490 Internship in Economics/Finance – 3 credit hours. This course integrates the theoretical knowledge in economics and
finance with practical application of that knowledge. Interested students with approved placements are eligible to take
this course for credit. Prerequisites: ECO 231, ECO 232, FIN 315.
Education Development
EDU 010 (Formerly EDU 100) Reading (General Education level) – 3 credit hours. Required of all entering freshmen and transfer
students (with fewer than 30 semester hours) scoring below 12.0 on the Nelson-Denny Reading Test (required placement
test). A corrective course of individualized reading instruction designed to improve basic reading, study, and cognitive
skills which are essential to success at the college level. Students who score below the requisite score on the COMPASS
are required to enroll. This course may extend for two semesters commensurate with the need of the student. Credit
hours for this course may not be counted toward any degree requirement. Prerequisites: None.
EDU 010L Reading with Lab – 3 credit hours. Corrective individualized reading instruction designed to improve basic reading,
study and cognitive skills, which are essential to success at the college level. Freshmen who enter the University with a
score between 0 and 11 on the Reading Subtest of the ACT or a score between 0 and 10.8 on the Nelson-Denny Reading
Test are required to register for this course. Students who do not pass this course are required to enroll in EDU 010.
Credit hours for this course may not be counted toward any degree requirement. Prerequisites: None.
EDU 011 (Formerly EDU 150) College Reading – 3 hours. A course providing both individualized and group reading instruction
to improve advanced reading, thinking, listening and study skills which are essential to success at the college level.
Students who score below the requisite score on the Reading component of the COMPASS are required to enroll in this 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 257 ~
level of the course. This is a one semester course. Credit hours for this course may not be counted toward any degree
requirement. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
EDU 101 Laboratory Approach to Concept Development – 2 credit hours. A program designed to aid those students who select to
major in education and must pass the Alabama Prospective Teacher’s Test (APTT) as stipulated by the Alabama State
Board of Education. Generally, the course gives students an opportunity to improve their performance on standardized
and teacher-made tests by allowing them to explore test-taking techniques and to participate in numerous activities
related to English usage, mathematics usage, reading and writing. Prerequisites: None.
EDU 306 Word Attack Technique Skills – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to prepare students to take and pass the
Elementary, Early Childhood and Special Education content knowledge of Praxis II. Prerequisites: None.
Electrical Engineering
EE 101 Introduction to Electrical Engineering – 3 credit hours. Fundamental concepts in electrical engineering are introduced.
Practical pre-calculus concepts are utilized. Students are required to develop an electrical project. Students develop
communication skills through presentations of projects and research of historical topics in the electrical engineering
discipline. Corequisites: MTH 115.
EE 109 Engineering Computing – 3 credit hours. This course introduces students to the concepts of utilizing computer systems
for solution of engineering problems using the C/C++ programming language. Formulation and development of problem
solving strategies are explored. Basic data representation and program flow control structures are discussed, as well as
techniques for input/output of data. Intermediate level data and program structures are introduced. Corequisites: MTH
115.
EE 201 Linear Circuit Analysis I – 3 credit hours. Kirchoff’s Laws, nodal analysis, mesh analysis, superposition, source
transformation, Thevenin and Norton theorems, maximum power transfer; inductance and capacitance; sinusoidal
waveforms; reactance, impedance; A.C. circuit analysis, power and power factor; and simple opamp circuits are covered
in this course. Prerequisites: EE 101, MTH 115.
EE 201L Linear Circuit Analysis I Lab – 1 credit hour. This course is the companion lab to EE 201. Corequisites: EE 201.
EE 202 Linear Circuit Analysis II – 3 credit hours. This is a continuation course to EE 201. It addresses analysis of ac circuits,
power calculations, Laplace transforms and application to transient analysis of electric circuits. Response to non-periodic
excitations using Fourier series is included. Concepts of frequency response, basic filter circuits are also considered.
Prerequisites: EE 201, EE 201L, MTH 125.
EE 203 Analog Circuit Design and Analysis I – 3 credit hours. An analysis of nonlinear semiconductor devices; PN junction
diodes, bipolar junction and field-effect transistors, biasing concepts, worst case analysis, and discrete amplifier circuit
design and analysis. Prerequisites: EE 201, EE 201L, MTH 125. Corequisites: EE 203L.
EE 203L Analog Circuit Design and Analysis I Lab – 1 credit hour. This course is the companion lab to EE-203 and includes both
analysis, simulation and fabrication of analog electronic circuits including diode circuits, bipolar junction transistor
amplifiers, operational amplifiers and circuits using operational amplifiers such as oscillators and filters. Prerequisites:
EE 201, EE 201L, MTH 125. Corequisites: EE 203.
EE 204 Digital Circuit Design and Analysis – 3 credit hours. Analysis and design of those circuits where the nonlinearity of the
active element is significant. Includes basic digital circuits, Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, encoding and decoding,
flip-flops, finite state machines, and analog-digital conversion. Prerequisites: EE 109, EE 201.
EE 301 Signals and Systems I – 3 credit hours. Continuous time signals and systems; impulse and step functions, signal
synthesis, convolution integrals, impulse response, transfer functions, poles and zeros, system responses, and state space
methods, introduction: discrete time Fourier series. Discrete time Fourier transforms, discrete time systems, difference
equations, and Z-transforms are introduced in this course. Prerequisites: EE 202. Corequisites: MTH 238.
EE 302 Signals and Systems II – 3 credit hours. A study of random signals and random input systems; probability, density
functions, random variables, random processes, Gaussian and Poisson processes; correlation functions, spectral density;
random input systems, analysis, and signal-to-noise ratio concepts. Prerequisites: EE 301.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 258 ~
EE 303 Electromagnetic Field Theory – 3 credit hours. A review of coordinate systems; vector analysis; study of electrostatics
to include Coulomb’s Law, Gauss’s Law, electric field intensity, and flux density calculations, electric potential
calculations; magnetostatics to include Biot-Savart law, Ampere’s law, magnetic field intensity and flux density
concepts; introduction to magnetic vector potential; time varying fields, Maxwell’s equations; and transmission lines.
Prerequisites: MTH 237, EE 202.
EE 304 Numerical Methods and Digital Computation – 3 credit hours. In this course numerical techniques are applied to the
solution of scientific and engineering problems. Topics include software development techniques, solution of both linear
and nonlinear equations, numerical integration and differentiation, interpolation and curve fitting, solution of differential
equations, and optimization techniques. Emphasis is placed on developing programs in C++ language for execution in a
UNIX environment. Prerequisites: EE 109, MTH 238.
EE 305 Semiconductor Engineering I – 3 credit hours. A study of semiconductor fundamentals and physics of semiconductor
devices to include: properties of materials and devices used in electrical engineering; theory of operation of
semiconductor devices; p-n junction diodes, bipolar transistors (n-p-n and p-n-p), and field-effect devices. Prerequisites:
EE 203, EE 203L, PHY 214.
EE 306 Survey of Energy Systems – 3 credit hours. This course reviews various sources of electric power including fossil fuel,
renewable energy including solar, wind, wave, geothermal, and biomass and nuclear energy. Technologies for energy
storage, transmission and distribution will also be included. Power plants, engines, radioactivity, and environmental
impacts will be discussed. Cost of generation, distribution, energy consumption, and efficiency of various energy
technologies are discussed. Prerequisites: EE 201, EE 202, PHY 214.
EE 307 (ME 307) Fundamentals of Nuclear Engineering – 3 credit hours. This course will cover basic nuclear physics,
fundamentals of radiation, radioactive decay, binding energy, types of interactions, shielding, and radioisotopes, fission
cross section, fission in a reactor, controlling fission chains, basic reactor model, reactor theory, components of nuclear
reactors, nuclear fuel cycles, radioactive waste storage and disposal, reactor accidents, safety, nonproliferation and
national security, radiation effects, radiation detectors, medical applications, nuclear propulsion. Prerequisites: CHE 101,
CHE 101L, PHY 214.
EE 308 Thermal Systems Engineering – 3 credit hours. The primary goal of this course is to teach fundamentals of
thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer. The course will impart working knowledge of thermal systems
utilized in nuclear powered electric generating systems. The course is intended to familiarize students in the nuclear
power concentration of the BSEE degree program with essentials of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics
through an integrated approach. Students will be introduced to the importance of thermal behavior of systems
encountered in nuclear powered electricity generating systems. Overview of fluid mechanics and heat transfer for electric
power general in nuclear power industry will be provided. Thermal behavior and heat transport phenomena encountered
in the nuclear power plant will be covered. Prerequisites: MTH 227, PHY 214. Corequisites: MTH 238.
EE 311 Electrical Engineering – 3 credit hours. This course is an introduction to Ohm’s Law, KCL and KVL equations, dc
circuit analysis; inductance and capacitance, AC circuit analysis; electrical machines, transformers, DC motors, DC
generators, induction motors, alternators, synchronous motors, principle of operation, characteristics, and applications.
This course is offered for non-EE majors only. Prerequisites: MTH 238. Corequisites: EE 311L.
EE 311L Electrical Engineering Lab – 1 credit hour. This course is a companion lab to EE 311. Corequisites: EE 311.
EE 320 Computer Architecture – 3 credit hours. Basic concepts used in computer hardware design and computer system
architecture are studied. The computer is presented as an infinite state machine. Basic computer functions such as
address and data paths, instruction sets and memory cycles, components such as registers, arithmetic units, instruction
decoders, and types of memories are discussed. A general purpose instruction set computer will be analyzed.
Prerequisites: EE 204. Corequisites: EE 320L.
EE 320L Digital Systems Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This laboratory course provides a hand-on approach to digital fundamentals
through the use of Complex Programmable Logic Devices (CPLDs and FPGAs). A number of laboratory projects will be
completed. Early experiments concentrate on basic logic devices, and then more complex combinatorial circuits follow,
including adders, multiplexers, encoders, and decoders. Low level memory devices including latches and flip-flops, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 259 ~
counters and registers are developed. The use of advanced logic device technology prepares students for work using an
industry-standard design environment. Corequisites: EE 320.
EE 330 Microprocessors – 3 credit hours. A study of number systems, binary arithmetic, basic structure and operation of
microcomputer systems. The microprocessor will be studied in both machine code and assembly language levels.
Students will write code in assembly language, interface external devices to the microcomputer system, and study bus
protocols. Prerequisites: EE 320, EE 320L.
EE 333 Analog Circuit Design and Analysis II – 3 credit hours. This course is a continuation of the material presented in EE 203
and includes concepts of advanced electronic circuit design and analysis. Prerequisites: EE 203, EE 203L.
EE 333L Analog Circuit Design and Analysis II Lab – 1 credit hour. This course is the companion lab to EE 333.
EE 340L Energy Conversion Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This course consists of experiments for determining the operating
characteristics of electrical machines. Transformers, induction motors, synchronous machines, and DC machines are
covered. Stepper motors, brushless DC motors, and other special machines are introduced. Prerequisites: EE 202, EE
203L.
EE 350 VLSI Design and Testing I – 3 credit hours. Principles of structured VLSI design with emphasis on MOS field effect
transistor characteristics; VLSI fabrication techniques for MOS circuits; circuit characterization and performance
estimation, logic design and testing. Prerequisites: EE 305.
EE 360L Communications Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This lab is designed to support the concepts taught in areas of microwaves
and transmission lines, the seven layered communication protocol, and lecture courses offered in the junior year of the
electrical engineering curriculum. Prerequisites: EE 301.
EE 402 Electrical Machines – 3 credit hours. A study of energy conversion; D.C. machines, motors, generators, principles of
operation, characteristics, and applications; transformers and induction machines, principles of operation, characteristics,
and applications; and synchronous machines, alternators, synchronous motors, principles of operation, characteristics,
and applications. Prerequisites: EE 303.
EE 403 (EE 503) Feedback System Analysis and Design – 3 credit hours. A study of open and closed loop systems; time domain
analysis; transfer functions, poles, and zeros; frequency response, Bode plots; root locus methods; system stability,
Routh-Hurwitz criterion, Nyquist criterion; system compensation and design; state space methods, state equations, state
transition matrix, and system response. Prerequisites: EE 301.
EE 404 (EE 504) Communication Theory – 3 credit hours. A study of communication signals and systems; AM and FM
methods; pulse code modulation; multiplexing, and digital communications. Prerequisites: EE 301.
EE 405L Simulation Techniques – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to provide hands on experience in the use of computer
software and simulation tools. Simulation using SPICE is emphasized. Software such as National Instruments Multisim,
LabView and Matlab will be used to analyze and design electronic circuits. The course will include the analysis and
design of mixed-signal electronics including analog to digital conversion and digital to analog conversion. Prerequisites:
EE 333.
EE 410 (EE 510) Microwave Engineering – 3 credit hours. A review of electromagnetic theory; transmission lines and
waveguides; circuit theory for waveguide systems; impedance matching and transformation; passive microwave devices;
electromagnetic resonators; and periodic structures and filters. Prerequisites: EE 303.
EE 410L Microwave Engineering Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This lab complements the course materials taught in EE 410,
Microwave Engineering. Corequisites: EE 410.
EE 411 Radar Engineering I – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of pulsed and continuous wave radar systems and the concepts of
range and doppler frequency measurement are presented. Radar receiver sensitivity, effects of noise, and component
losses are analyzed. Techniques of signal detection in noise, parameter estimation, and radar waveform analysis are
introduced. The effects of radar cross-section, clutter, multipath, and electronic countermeasures on the received signal
are analyzed. Prerequisites: Senior standing, instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 260 ~
EE 420 (E 520) Power Systems I – 3 credit hours. Fundamental concepts of power system analysis, transmission line parameters,
basic system models, steady state performance, network calculations, power flow solutions, symmetrical components,
fault studies, operating strategies and control are presented in this course. Prerequisites: EE 202, EE 301.
EE 421 (EE 521) Power Systems II – 3 credit hours. The intent of the course is to reinforce the fundamental concepts of Power
Systems I and build upon them including the ongoing modernization and restructuring of the electric utility industry It is
intended to cover the following topics: Renewable energy sources including micro-grids, photovoltaic and wind
generation, transmission line parameters, steady-state operation of transmission lines, power flow, economic dispatch
and optimal power flow, three phase, steady-state, normal operating condition. It would also explain the role of state of
the art transformers in power transmission and distribution systems. High voltage DC, distribution systems, synchronous
generators, voltage stability, transient stability, power system controls, including generator voltage control, etc.
Prerequisites: EE 420.
EE 422 (EE 522) Smart Grid Cyber Security – 3 credit hours. SMI & CS is intended for senior EE students who have completed
introductory and intermediate courses in circuits, signals, and power systems. The scope of the course covers the two
distinct aspects (a) smart metering infrastructure, and (b) security and privacy challenges that come along from the
backdoor. Topics will include: Fundamentals of smart grids; smart metering infrastructure (SMI); SMI and security
aspects at subscriber end and at the utility end; SMI and security aspects in smart metering communication/sensors
networks; SMI and subscribers’ privacy aspects; SMI, and attack detection and recovery. Prerequisites: EE 202, EE 301,
420.
EE 424 Advanced Digital Systems – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to provide seniors in electrical and computer
engineering with real digital system design experience using the Verilog hardware description language (Verilog HDL).
The history of descriptive hardware design and features of hardware description languages are explained along with
design and simulation examples. With the use of the industry standard simulation and synthesis tools, designs will be
constructed, synthesized, and configured in Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) or other Programmable Logic
Devices. Experience gained in this class will prepare students to move directly into modern logic design environments.
Prerequisites: EE 330.
EE 425 High Performance Computing and Networks – 3 credit hours. This course introduces students to the cutting edge of high
performance computing, examining both parallel and distributed architectures and the networks that interconnect them.
The course covers a number of topics, ranging from computing and network architecture, design of software
applications, to hands-on supercomputing. Prerequisites: EE 304, senior standing.
EE 426 (EE 526) Next Generation Mobile Networks – 3 credit hours. Architecture, applications, and services is intended for
senior EE students and graduate students. The scope of the course covers the architecture, application, and service
aspects of 5G mobile networks. Topics include: Radio aspects of 5G telecommunication system; evolved packet core
which is based on modern IP-based architecture designed to provide flexible platform and standard mechanisms to
interwork with other IP-based systems; Internet of Things (IoT), which is the second wave of wireless communication
revolution that began with the widespread adoption of smart phones; smart grid networks; public safety services based
on 5G broadband networks; cloud services and cloud computing; hypervisor and virtual machines. Prerequisites: EE 301,
EE 404.
EE 430 Integrated Circuit Engineering – 3 credit hours. Analysis, design and fabrication of silicon, thin-film, and thick-film
integrated circuits; circuit simulation studies aided with SPICE II software system; integrated operational amplifiers and
logic gates (T2L, I2L, MOS and CMOS) are treated in this course. Prerequisites: EE 305.
EE 431 (EE 531) Semiconductor Engineering II – 3 credit hours. Principles of device electronics, physics of band models,
Schottky barriers, bipolar and unipolar devices, conduction phenomena, SRH generation-recombination statistics, role of
defects and noise. Introduction to wide bandgap semiconductors and devices. Prerequisites: EE 305.
EE 441 (EE 541) Digital Signal Processing – 3 credit hours. A review of discrete time signals and systems; sampling of
continuous time signals, sampling theorem; discrete time Fourier transforms; Z-transforms; region of convergence;
applications; discrete Fourier transforms; fast Fourier transforms; design of digital filters, IIR filters, FIR filters, and
computer-aided design. Prerequisites: EE 301
EE 445 Advanced Electromagnetic Theory – 3 credit hours. Solution of Laplace’s equation in two dimensions, circular
harmonics, cylindrical harmonics, method of finite differences; wave propagation, perfect dielectrics, conductors, lossy 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 261 ~
dielectrics, transmission line analogy, Smith chart solutions; and computer applications are covered. Prerequisites: EE
303.
EE 451 (EE 551) Integrated Circuit Fabrication – 3 credit hours. Introduction to principles of monolithic IC fabrication including
bipolar and MOS transistor processing. The course includes active and passive device and process design, simulation,
cleanroom procedures, in-process and final test and evaluation techniques, yield, chip assembly and packaging. A
practicum is required. Prerequisites: EE 305. Corequisites: EE 451L.
EE 451L Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This laboratory course provides a hand-on clean room
experience fabricating an integrated circuit (IC) chip. Silicon-based semiconductor technology and standard IC
microfabrication processes for the fabrication of the microchip will be implemented through the course. Specific clean
room fabrication processes and techniques used in the class include basic clean room skills, mask layout and fabrication,
UV lithography, wet and dry oxidation, wet and dry etching, thermal diffusion, metallization, packaging, and device
characterization. The students will fabricate a device wafer and characterize the electrical properties of the fabricated
devices and circuits on the wafer. Corequisites: EE 451.
EE 452 (EE 552) Semiconductor Instrumentation – 3 credit hours. Basic principles of semiconductor testing and evaluation.
Various tools and techniques will be introduced for test and evaluation of semiconductor materials, devices and
integrated circuits. Prerequisites: EE 305.
EE 455 Optimal Control Theory – 3 credit hours. A review of state space methods; optimal control problems, performance
criterion, minimum time problems, minimum energy problems, and minimum fuel problems; optimization, using
calculus of variations, Lagrange, Meyer, and Bolza problems, Lagrange equations, solution, applications; Pontryagin’s
maximum principle, formulation, costate variables, solution; dynamic programming, principle of optimality, discrete
control processes; Hamilton-Jacobi approach, closed loop control law, matrix Riccati equation, applications; and stability
in the sense of Lyapunov are covered. Prerequisites: EE 403.
EE 456 Nonlinear Control Systems – 3 credit hours. A study of nonlinearities, classification, saturation, dead zone, hysteresis;
phase plane formulation, phase portraits; describing function approach, limit cycles, and relay servomechanisms.
Prerequisites: EE 403.
EE 460 (ME 460) Nuclear Reactor Engineering I – 3 credit hours. This course introduces students to nuclear power generation
concepts and systems. Topics will include heat generation and removal from reactors, steady and unsteady-state
conduction mechanisms in the reactor elements, single and two-phases, and liquid metal cooling core thermal design.
Prerequisites: (EE 307 or ME 307), EE 308.
EE 461 (ME 461) Nuclear Reactor Engineering II – 3 credit hours. This course is the continuation of EE 460 (Nuclear Reactor
Engineering I). It provides the BSEE students in the NP concentration with more advanced knowledge in reactor
engineering and prepares them for careers in the nuclear power industry. Topics include heat generation and removal
studies from reactors, reactor-specific issues, heat transfer calculations, heat flux calculations and core thermal design,
major safety issues. Prerequisites: EE 460 or ME 460.
EE 470 Engineering Analysis and Design I – 2 credit hours. Students must demonstrate their complete engineering capabilities
by participating in a capstone design project. Project management and engineering ethics are included. This first course
is provided to facilitate project selection, literature survey, and orientation. Meeting times are flexible. Prerequisites:
Senior standing, instructor consent.
EE 471 Engineering Analysis and Design II – 2 credit hours. This is a continuation of EE 470 and is provided to facilitate
completion of the capstone design project. Meeting times are flexible. Prerequisites: EE 470.
EE 490 Special Topics – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on topics based on modern trends in electrical engineering. This
course can be taken multiple times with students receiving additional credit each time. The specifics of each course will
be identified at the beginning of each semester. Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
Electrical Engineering Technology
EET 103 Introduction to Engineering Technology – 3 credit hours. A course providing a broad view of the many specialties in
engineering and technology and discussions the differences between engineering science and engineering technology.
This course acquaints the beginning student with the fundamental mathematical and physical concepts, tools, equipment, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 262 ~
and language of the electrical and mechanical fields. Scheduling, planning, and time management skills are developed.
Prerequisites: None.
EET 109 Digital Fundamentals – 3 credit hours. A study of digital fundamentals, including Boolean algebra, different basenumbering systems, logic gates and combinational and sequential logic. Introduced are simplification techniques such as
Karnaugh mapping. The basic concepts of digital design are presented. The course includes laboratory. Prerequisites:
None.
EET 110 DC Circuits – 3 credit hours. A study of further DC circuit concepts including Kirchoff’s Laws, Thevenin’s Theorem,
Superposition Theorem, and the basic design of DC instruments, magnetic circuits, and transient analysis. Prerequisites:
None.
EET 200L Basic Electricity and Electronics – 4 credit hours. A study of the basic aspects of DC and AC circuits. This course is
suitable for the non-EET majors who require a background in electrical and electronic components, circuits, and
applications. Analysis of circuits by computer methods is introduced. Includes laboratory. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
EET 210 AC Circuits – 3 credit hours. A study of basic principles of alternating circuits, vectors, phase relationship, inductance,
capacitance, impedance and reactance. The application of network theorems to a-c analysis, and investigation of
resonance phenomena are also discussed. Prerequisites: EET 110.
EET 211L EET Lab I – 1 credit hour. A course including laboratory projects in Digital Logic, DC Circuits, AC Circuits, Electronics
and Microcontrollers. The Lab will meet each week starting the first week of the semester. A strict schedule will be
followed so that all projects can be completed before the end of the semester. The lab will require the students to work in
teams assigned by the instructor. Quality technical reports will be required for each project and several projects will
require oral presentations. The student should be prepared to meet with team members outside class time to prepare the
reports and presentations. A specific lab report format will be adhered to. Prerequisites: EET 109, EET 110.
EET 212 Electronics – 3 credit hours. An introduction to semiconductor physics, including electronic devices such as solid state
diodes, BJT and FET transistor amplifier circuits, with emphasis on the understanding of basic circuit analysis.
Computer methods are used for transient analysis. Prerequisites: EET 110.
EET 228 Electrical Power & Control – 3 credit hours. Design, analysis, and application of circuits using operational amplifiers,
four-layer solid state devices such as SCR's and triacs, and linear integrated circuits. Discussion includes AC/DC motors
and generators and other industrial control devices. Prerequisites: EET 210, EET 212.
EET 231 Instrumentation - 3 credit hours. Real-world applications of computers and devices for electronic instrumentation and
studies of industrial devices most commonly used by industry in Automated Process Control Systems. Students learn
about electrical and mechanical transducers used for the measurement of temperature, pressure, flow and position, and
complete exercises using computers and computer interfacing to give a realistic approach to the industrial application of
these devices. Prerequisites: EET 211L.
EET 241 Microcontrollers I – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the Microchip’s PIC microprocessor. Students will learn to design
embedded system using industry standard components and assemblies. Topics include PIC architecture, arithmetic logic,
data handling, interrupt concepts, subroutines, and elementary Basic language programming. Prerequisites: EET 109,
EET 110.
EET 290L EET Lab II – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in Instrumentation, Power and Control, AC Circuits, Electronics, and
Microcontrollers. The Lab will meet each week starting the first week of the semester. A strict schedule will be followed
so that all projects can be completed before the end of the semester. The lab will require the student to work in teams
assigned by the instructor. Quality technical reports will be required for each project and several projects will require
oral presentations. The student should be prepared to meet with team members outside class time to prepare the reports
and presentations. A specific lab report format will be adhered to. Prerequisites: EET 211L.
EET 300 Engineering Ethics and Professionalism – 3 credit hours. This course proves a broad view of the many aspects of
engineering ethics, code of ethics, and professionalism. Topics include the issues of diversity and knowledge of societal
and global issues. The course utilizes classical materials in ethics as well as contemporary case studies of ethics and
professionalism. Students are required to work in prearranged groups. All students are required to prepare and present
oral presentations. Some assignments require group interaction outside class times. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 263 ~
EET 303 Machinery I – 3 credit hours. A study of the technical characteristics of various field and armature connections of D-C
generators and motors, including trouble shooting and maintenance. Laboratory experiments allow the demonstration of
the concepts discussed in the classroom. Prerequisites: EET 210.
EET 304 Machinery II – 3 credit hours. A study of polyphone systems balanced and unbalanced, generator, basic connection,
parallel loads, voltage regulation, power factor correction, transformer connections, phase-sequence indicator, twophase, and three phase systems, wattmeter connection. The laboratory experiments allow the demonstration of the
concepts discussed in the classroom. Prerequisites: EET 303.
EET 310L EET Lab III – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in PLCs, Instrumentation, Power and Control. The Lab will meet each
week starting the first week of the semester. A strict schedule will be followed so that all projects can be completed
before the end of the semester. The lab will require the student to work in teams assigned by the instructor. Quality
technical reports will be required for each project and several projects will require oral presentations. The student should
be prepared to meet with team members outside class time to prepare the reports and presentations. A specific lab report
format will be adhered to. Prerequisites: EET 290L.
EET 312 Methods of Engineering Analysis – 3 credit hours. A study of probability, statistics, and differential equations and their
applications to engineering problems. Emphasis is placed on the use of Microsoft Excel in the solution of these
applications. Prerequisites: TBC 102, MTH 126.
EET 318 Advanced Digital Circuits – 3 credit hours. A study of basic logic functions, random and sequential logic circuits,
memory, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, code converters, and applications of logic circuits in digital
systems. Prerequisites: EET 109.
EET 341 Microcontroller II – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the Microchip’s PIC12F675 and PIC16F684 microcontrollers.
Students will learn to design embedded system using industry standard components and assemblies. Topics include
PIC’s advance assembly instructions, Hitachi 44780 compatible LCD display module, analogue-to-digital conversion
module, data EEPROM memory, and building project using the LCD display, sensors, and PICkit I. Prerequisites: EET
241.
EET 351 Advanced Circuit Analysis – 3 credit hours. A comprehensive coverage of circuit analysis utilizing the Laplace
transform. Also covered are active filter design, and computer solutions using PSPICE. Prerequisites: EET 210.
EET 360 (MET/INT 360) Project Management – 3 credit hours. Theory and practice of managing projects including the
application of modern project management software to efficiently plan, schedule, and control project activities. Topics
include work breakdown structures, precedence grids, precedence node diagrams, analytical methods for network
solutions, resource scheduling, leveling and allocation, time-cost tradeoffs, and project-scheduling stimulation.
Prerequisites: INT 206.
EET 370 PLC I – 3 credit hours. Designed to introduce the student to a wide range of industrial automatic controls. The
programmable logic controller is the base of study with the emphasis on programming. Included are the various types of
transducers common to the industrial environment and the interfacing of I/O devices to the PLC. Modes of control,
process response, and the final correcting devices are discussed. Prerequisites: EET 231.
EET 380 Computer Networks I – 3 credit hours. An introduction to computer networks. The fundamentals of modern networking
theory are covered. The course includes the terminology and technology of basic through state-of-the-art networking
hardware and software. Network system concepts are examined from a wide range of applications including small work
groups, local area networks, wide area networks, and global networking and modern network technology and
applications including Wi-Fi, Microsoft Networks and CISCO routers. The course covers the material necessary for
taking the Network+ certification exam. Prerequisites: EET 211L.
EET 390L EET Lab IV – 2 credit hours. Laboratory projects in Computer Networks and PLCs. The Lab will meet each week
starting the first week of the semester. A strict schedule will be followed so that all projects can be completed before the
end of the semester. The lab will require the student to work in teams assigned by the instructor. Quality technical reports
will be required for each project and several projects will require oral presentations. The student should be prepared to
meet with team members outside class time to prepare the reports and presentations. A specific lab report format will be
adhered to. Prerequisites: EET 310L.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 264 ~
EET 411 Data Communication Systems – 3 credit hours. Overview of digital communication and an introduction to the concepts
that lead to the implementation of digital systems. Topics covered are digital signal techniques, modulation and
demodulation, error control coding and system synchronization, and application of phase-locked loops. The effects of
noise and noise-induced design trade-offs are discussed and the complete design of a bit synchronizer is presented.
Prerequisites: EET 212.
EET 421 Computer Design & Construction – 3 credit hours (2 clock hour lecture and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). A course
covering the current state of the art in computer design as applied to industrial applications and computer networking.
This course covers the material necessary for taking the A+ certification. Prerequisites: EET 380.
EET 428 EET Capstone Design Phase I – 1 credit hour. Course demonstrating proficiency in analysis, layout, and completion of
an electrical project. This first course is provided to facilitate project selection, project planning/scheduling, literature
survey, and proposal writing. The student must complete an acceptable project proposal including presentation. Meeting
times are flexible. Prerequisites: EET 390L & MET 315.
EET 429 EET Capstone Design Phase II – 1 credit hour. A continuation of EET 428 focusing on the completion of the project and
presentation of the final results. The course is conducted to simulate the procedures utilized by local industries to
conduct engineering projects. An objective of the course is to demonstrate and practice the diverse skills and teamwork
required in the modern workplace. Prerequisites: EET 428.
EET 490 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering Technology – 1-3 credit hours. Focuses on topics based on modern trends in
electrical engineering technology. This course can be taken multiple times (in different topics) with students receiving
additional credit each time. The specifics of each course will be identified at the beginning of each semester.
Prerequisites: Junior standing.
EET 499 VLSI Circuit Design – 4 credit hours. A study of design and layout techniques for microelectronics, both digital and
analog. An introduction of MOS VLSI design technology, design application projects utilizing computer workstation
resources may be undertaken at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisites: EET 318.
Engineering General Course
EGC 101 Engineering Drawing and Graphics – 3 credit hours. A study of principles of design drafting, and graphics as applied to
engineering, geometric constructions, multi-view drawing using computer graphics package. Corequisites: CE 101.
EGC 104 Computer Programming – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the use of the computer as a tool in engineering. Systems
and utility programs, programming techniques, recent developments in computing, and practice in solving engineering
problems are included. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: MTH 125.
EGC 204 Engineering Analysis – 3 credit hours. An introduction to statistics and data analysis, probability and sampling
distributions, quality control, estimation and statistical intervals, testing statistical hypotheses, the analysis of variance,
experimental data, regression and correlation, and computer applications in Civil Engineering. Prerequisites: MTH 126.
EGC 205 Statics – 3 credit hours. Fundamental definitions and the concepts of static equilibrium, systems of forces and couples,
application to solution of trusses and frames, friction, centroids and moments of inertia are covered in this course.
Prerequisites: MTH 125, PHY 213. Corequisites: EGC 101 or instructor consent.
EGC 206 Dynamics – 3 credit hours. A study of kinematics of a particle; moment of inertia of masses; translation, rotation and
plane motion of rigid bodies; principles of work and energy, impulse, and momentum, as applied to engineering
problems. Prerequisites: EGC 205, MTH 126.
EGC 207 Strength of Materials – 3 credit hours. Concepts of stress and strain, combined stresses, analysis of stresses and
deformation in bodies loaded by axial, torsional, and bending loads. Prerequisites: EGC 205, MTH 126. Co-requisite (for
CE Majors): EGC 104.
EGC 207L Strength of Materials Lab – 1 credit hour. The purpose of this course is to present a selection of experiments that will
demonstrate the principles of Mechanics of Materials. A Laboratory Manual for this course will be used for performing
these experiments. Corequisites: EGC 207.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 265 ~
EGC 305 Fluid Mechanics – 3 credit hours. A study of the properties of fluids and fundamental principles governing fluid motion,
including fluid statics; conservation of mass momentum and energy with application to pipe and channel flow of
incompressible fluids. Prerequisites: EGC 206, MTH 238. Corequisites: EGC 305L.
EGC 305L Fluid Mechanics Lab – 1 credit hour. The purpose of this course is to present a selection of experiments that will
demonstrate the principles of Fluid Mechanics. A Laboratory Manual for this course will be used for performing these
experiments. Corequisites: EGC 305.
EGC 350 Engineering Economics – 3 credit hours. Application of principles and techniques of economic analysis for evaluating
projects, equipment, and system feasibility. Topics include time value of money, economic evaluation with net present
value, rate of return, and benefit cost ratio, depreciation, inflation, replacement analysis, tax considerations, and risk
analysis. Use of Excel spreadsheet and functions for economy analysis is emphasized. Prerequisites: MTH 125.
Elementary Education
ELE 300 Elementary School Organization – 3 credit hours. A survey of all aspects of elementary education as a professional career.
Candidates will become familiar with dynamics affecting research-based best teaching practices in the elementary school.
Special emphasis will be given to integrating the elementary school curriculum to meet the needs of diverse populations,
including students from various cultural backgrounds, students with special learning needs, and students who are English
language learners. Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education.
ELE 301 Project Based Learning – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the study and use of the Project Based Learning (PBL)
Model to develop instructional units with attention given to working in a diverse and multi-cultural society. In class
discussions and activities will be centered on exploration of issues related to PBL. During the course, students will work
independently and collaboratively through all phases of successful PBL, from deciding on a project theme to reflecting on the
outcomes of a project. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP.
ELE 495 Internship – 12 credit hours. Fourteen weeks of full-time teaching under the immediate direction of supervising teachers
in off-campus public schools. Upon return to the campus, students share their experiences, discuss problems, and
develop new techniques in a professional seminar. Prerequisites: Senior classification; official admission to Teacher
Education Program; minimum cumulative average of 2.75, “C” in all coursework completed, with no grade less than a
“C” for professional courses; completion of all coursework in the program. Weekly seminar is required.
English
ENG 010 (Formerly ENG 100) Developmental English – 4 credit hours. This course addresses the needs of those freshmen whose
placement scores are not considered adequate for ENG 101. It focuses on grammar and usage, mechanics, organization,
and writing paragraphs and essays in various genres. Credit hours for this course may not be counted toward any degree
requirement. Prerequisites: None.
ENG 101 Composition I – 3 credit hours. A course presenting an opportunity for freshmen to develop maturity in writing skills.
Students must demonstrate adequate competence in writing on the final essay examination. Prerequisites: None.
ENG 101E Composition I with Lab – 4 credit hours (3 clock hour lecture and 1 clock hour lab per week). This course is designed to
successfully move students whose ACT scores demonstrate a minimal deficiency in English to readiness and mastery of
the outcomes for college-level writing I. The course requires a mandatory one hour of Structured Learning Assistance
(SLA) each week as well as tutorial assistance. Prerequisites: Approval of Freshman Academy Advisor.
ENG 101H Composition I Honors – 3 credit hours. A course presenting an opportunity for freshmen to develop maturity in using
communication skills. Advanced reading and writing assignments will be given. Enrollment in the Honors program is
required. Prerequisites: None.
ENG 102 Composition II – 3 credit hours. A course presenting a continuation of Composition I. Emphasis is placed on the research
paper. Prerequisites: ENG 101.
ENG 102H Composition II Honors – 3 credit hours. A course presenting a continuation of Honors Composition I. A research project
is required. Enrollment in the Honors program is required. Prerequisites: ENG 101H.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 266 ~
ENG 201 Survey of English Literature I – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of English literature from the
Old English Period through the Neo-classical Period. Masterpieces of the various literary eras are given special attention.
Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 202 Survey of English Literature II – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of English literature from
the Romantic Period through the Contemporary Period. Masterpieces of the various literary eras are given special
attention. Prerequisites: ENG 201.
ENG 203 World Literature I – 3 credit hours. A study of world literature from ancient Mesopotamian through the Renaissance.
Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 203H World Literature I Honors – 3 credit hours. An in-depth and critical reading of selected major texts in World Literature
representing some of the most ancient civilizations in the BCE period – Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Hebrew, Greek,
Roman – and in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Prerequisites: ENG 102. Co-requisites: Admissions to Honors
Program.
ENG 204 World Literature II – 3 credit hours. A study of world literature from the Age of Reason through the modern period.
Prerequisites: ENG 203.
ENG 204H World Literature II Honors – 3 credit hours. An advanced study of world literature from the Age of Reason through the
modern period. Honor students who enroll in this course will be expected to read an extensive number of short stories
and novels and will be engaged in multiple projects connected to the literature of the period. Prerequisites: ENG 203 and
formal admittance to the Honor's Program.
ENG 205 General Speech – 3 credit hours. Presentation of the fundamentals of voice and diction implemented through the various
types of speech: public speaking, group discussion, oral interpretation, debate, and informal speech. Prerequisites: ENG
102.
ENG 207 Survey of American Literature I – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of American literature
from the Colonial Period to 1865. The principal authors are given special attention. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 208 Survey of American Literature II – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of American literature
from 1865 to the Contemporary Period. The principal authors are given special attention. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 300 Introduction to the Discipline of English – 3 credit hours. ENG 300 introduces students to concepts and methods
fundamental to critical reading and writing in the discipline of English. Required of all English majors. Prerequisites:
(ENG 201 and ENG 202) or (ENG 207 and ENG 208).
ENG 303 Technical and Professional Writing – 3 credit hours. Focuses on practical writing, especially technical or scientific
reports and proposals, with emphasis on organizations, research, and presentation. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 304 Advanced Composition – 3 credit hours. The principles of rhetoric with supplementary readings and ample practice to
develop the skills of students in expressing themselves beyond freshman competency. Prerequisites: ENG 102 or ENG
102H.
ENG 305 Sixteenth Century English Literature – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of non-dramatic
literature of the Renaissance in England. Much attention is given to major authors of the period and genres that entered
English literature at this time. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202.
ENG 306 Seventeenth Century English Literature – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical, and appreciative study of the prose and
poetry of the seventeenth century. Special attention is given to Donne and Milton. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202.
ENG 307 Shakespeare – 3 credit hours. A study of selected dramas of Shakespeare - tragedies, comedies, romances, histories, and
selected sonnets. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202.
ENG 308 Literary Criticism – 3 credit hours. Close analysis of representative works in literary criticism from the ancients to the
present. It includes the application of modes of criticism to various texts in a number of genres. Prerequisites: ENG 300.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 267 ~
ENG 310 Journalism Workshop – 2 credit hours. This course teaches major forms of journalistic writing including report writing.
Emphasis is placed on the principles and practice of news writing, editing, and layout. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 311 Creative Writing – 3 credit hours. A course designed to help students interested in creative writing develop their skills as
writers of poetry and prose. A workshop environment including exercises, peer criticism and writing models will be
used. Prerequisites: ENG 204.
ENG 313 Black Drama – 3 credit hours. This course is a historical survey of black drama or a concentration on black drama of a
particular period. It includes analyses and reading of plays as literature and/or theater. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or ENG
204.
ENG 314 Black Film – 3 credit hours. This course presents a comprehensive study of black film of various themes and genres
within this literacy and cultural canon. It may be a survey of genre course at various times. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or
ENG 204.
ENG 315 Adolescent Literature – 3 credit hours. A study of literature written with adolescent readers as the target audience.
Attention is given to the definitions, characteristics, and issues of classic and contemporary literature, the various genres
(fiction, non-fiction, poetry), media, categories (e.g. science fiction, historical fiction, graphic novels), themes, as well as
the cultural experiences of American ethnic minorities. Prerequisites: ENG 203, ENG 204.
ENG 392 Special Topics in Modern American Novel – 3 credit hours. Special topics in Modern American Novel studies the
modern American novel focusing on a particular theme or historical approach as dictated by faculty and/or student
interest. Topics may include in-depth analysis of one major author; writers of a particular gender, ethnicity, or stylistic
preference; or a closer look at one historical period. Prerequisites: ENG 300.
ENG 400 Discourse Analysis – 3 credit hours. This course provides students with the knowledge and skills that enable them to
look into the English language beyond the sentence level in spoken and written context; equip students with a critical
awareness of the role language plays in social and cultural interactions; and assist then in further developing critical
comprehension and thinking skills. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 401 Romantic Writers – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical and appreciative study of the prose and poetry of the Romantic
Movement. Special attention is given to Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, and Keats. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or
ENG 202.
ENG 402 Victorian Writers – 3 credit hours. A critical, historical and appreciative study of the prose and poetry of the Victorian
period. Special attention is given to Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, and Carlyle. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202.
ENG 403 Play Production – 2 credit hours. Development of the skills and techniques necessary for staging successfully an amateur
dramatic production. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 404 Survey of African American Literature – 3 credit hours. An introduction to African American literature from its early
beginning to the present. Emphasis will be placed on the literature’s historical context and the political and cultural
forces that shaped the African American experience. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 405 Advanced Grammar – 3 credit hours. A thorough study of traditional English grammar. It may also include structural,
generative, and transformational methods. Prerequisites: ENG 102.
ENG 406 Negritude – 3 credit hours. This course examines Negritude, a Francophone philosophical and literary movement of the
1930’s and its connections to other literary and cultural movements including the Harlem Renaissance. It will study
specifically authors such as Leopold Sedar Singhor and Aime Cesaire. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or ENG 204.
ENG 407 Senior Seminar – 3 credit hours. A critical and contextual reading of major texts in English and American literature.
Emphasis will be placed on formal presentation of well-researched papers. Prerequisites: ENG 308.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the English program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
ENG 408 Medieval Literature – 3 credit hours. A study of major genres and works of British literature from the Anglo-Saxon
period to the fifteenth century. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202 or ENG 207 or ENG 208.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 268 ~
ENG 409 History of the English Language – 3 credit hours. The historical development of the English language from the AngloSaxon Period to the present, including attention to the social, political, and intellectual forces that have determined the
nature of its development. Prerequisites: ENG 201 or ENG 202 or ENG 207 or ENG 208.
ENG 411 Special Topics in Black Women Literature – 3 credit hours. This course studies the works of women writers of African
descent. Topics will vary and may focus on particular literary elements such as genre, time period, country of origin, or
theme. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or ENG 204.
ENG 412 Literature on Film – 3 credit hours. A study of major works of literature and film adaptations of those works, with
particular attention to the interpretive choices made by such performative works. Subject matter may vary. Prerequisites:
ENG 102.
ENG 420 Post-Colonial Theory and Literature – 3 credit hours. A study of theories of post-coloniality and the literature produced
in former British colonies. Emphasis will be placed on the literature in Africa and the West Indies. Prerequisites: ENG
204.
Entrepreneur
ETR 315 Principles of Entrepreneurship – 3 credit hours. An introductory course intended to provide students with a solid
foundation in terms of the vital role played by entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship in the 21st century global economy.
Emphasis is on entrepreneurship as a manageable process that can be applied in virtually any organizational setting. It is
also a course that integrates a number of different disciplines, ranging from sociology and psychology to economics,
finance, marketing, and human resource management. Further, it is a course that mixes theory with practice, and you will
be challenged to apply principles, concepts and frameworks to real world situations.
ETR 319 Identification and Evaluation of New Venture Opportunities – 3 credit hours. Focuses on identifying, discovering and
evaluating new venture opportunities. Covers criteria tools and dynamics involved in systematic search and creative
thinking methods to generate ideas. Examines the process and difficulties of analyzing new venture ideas to produce a
solid business opportunity. Prerequisites: ETR 315 or instructor consent.
ETR 320 Planning and Launching of New Ventures – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on business plan development, especially
the financial aspects of the plan. The intent is that students will use a feasibility analysis, such as the one completed in
ETR 315, and turn that into a complete business plan. Additionally, students will learn about seed capital, venture, and
other means of financing new ventures. Recommended background for this course: ETR 315 and MKT 410.
ETR 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Entrepreneurship – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in
the form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience
related to the student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development
Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The
student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to
receive ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
ETR 430 Growing and Managing New Ventures – 3 credit hours. One of the most troublesome aspects of entrepreneurship is
running the business once it is started. This course focuses on techniques to grow the new venture and how to manage
both the growth and operations. Considerable emphasis will be placed on expanding existing markets, finding new
markets, anticipating the next generation of products, and managing cash flow. This course is the capstone course for
both the Entrepreneurship Minor and the Management Minor. Recommended background for this course: ETR 320.
ETR 440 Field Studies in Entrepreneurial Firms – 3 credit hours. Supervised study of an organization in one of two forms.
Students may work in student groups to establish a relationship, identify a strategic problem or question, design and
execute a study, and report implementable recommendations to a regional firm or work in a supervised internship in an
entrepreneurial business. Recommended background for this course: ETR 430.
ETR 445 Senior Portfolio: Writing the Business Plan – 3 credit hours. Students will study the basic components and varied
audiences for the business plan. Each student will write a business plan and will be required to present the plan to a panel
of business leaders. Recommended background for this course: ETR 315 and MKT 410.
Food & Animal Sciences
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 269 ~
FAS 101 Food & Survival of Man – 2 credit hours. The study of most common information regarding food and its role in human
society. Prerequisites: None.
FAS 102 Introduction to Food Science – 3 credit hours. Food science and its relation to agriculture; opportunities in the various
fields of food industry; trends in procurement, management, processing, distribution and utilization of food; food raw
materials and constituents; biochemical aspects of food composition; food spoilage; and principles of food processing
and preservation. Prerequisites: None.
FAS 110 Animal Bio-Health Terminology – 1 credit hour. This course familiarizes student with terms used in animal bio-health
sciences. The course will provide students with a series of lectures and audiovisual presentations which will focus on
rules of building and analyzing medical terms associated with the body and appropriate medical terminology.
Additionally, the course will be introduced with an overview of body systems anatomy and physiology by analyzing root
medical terms in each body system. This will be followed by a comprehensive scientific context and several lessons on
the anatomy and physiology of body systems and the corresponding medical terms related to them. Prerequisites: None.
FAS 112 Introduction to Animal Bio-Health Sciences – 3 credit hours. This course is a comprehensive introduction to current
issues in animal science, including the use of animals in biomedical research, diseases, health care, and the management
of domestic and companion animals. Topics include: basic animal biosecurity, animal nutrition, animal physiology,
reproduction, animal biomedical models, breeding, disease prevention and control. Students will develop an appreciation
for animal bio-health sciences and the application of scientific principles in animal production. Prerequisites: None.
FAS 241 Undergraduate Scientific Writing – 2 credit hours. This course aims to utilize skills relating to the process of conducting
scientific research to teach the fundamentals of effective scientific writing. Instruction will focus primarily on the
process of writing scientific laboratory reports/manuscripts. The course will apply the basics of experimental design, data
collection, data analysis and hypothesis testing. Prerequisites: FAS 102.
FAS 259 Companion Animal Management – 3 credit hours. This course looks at animal science and how it relates to raising dogs
and cats. Animal-related topics such as choosing a dog or cat, feeding and nutrition, training and handling, healthcare
and safety, and reproduction will be emphasized. In addition, the course will include approaches to common behavior
problems, selective breeding, and regulatory issues. Prerequisites: BIO 101 or BIO 103.
FAS 306 Sensory Evaluation – 3 credit hours. A study of principles and methodology of sensory evaluation; application of
methods; instrumentation in physical evaluation of food; and analysis of sensory and instrumental data. Prerequisites:
FAS 102.
FAS 311 Fundamentals of Dairy Science – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the fundamentals of dairy in the United States. Types of
dairy farms, selection and breeding; raising and managing dairy calves and heifers; care and management of cows and
sires; and factors influencing the quantity and quality of milk and milk products are addressed. Labor-saved devices and
practices used to develop economical and efficient herd management will be presented. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 312 Food Service Health Management – 1 credit hour. Short course offered through Madison County Health Authorities for
Food Service Managers certification with 14 hours classroom contact. Course is designed to give managers and owners
the skills to find the food-borne illness hazards in their operations. Students are introduced to a system which utilizes
policies, procedures and standards designed to prevent recurring problems. Basic sanitation management principles will
be discussed. After completing the course, participants will be prepared to develop or upgrade their food safety program
using HACCP (Hazard Critical Control Procedure) concepts. Prerequisites: None.
FAS 320 Animal Biosecurity & Diseases – 3 credit hours. This course will cover a wide range of topics related to diagnosing,
treatment, and preventing of companion and food animals from diseases. The course will be introduced with an overview
of the scope and nature of animal health disorders, including the threats diseases by viruses and bacteria agents. This will
be followed by a comprehensive scientific context and several lessons on specific systemic diseases on animal’s and an
illustration of the physiological impacts of the diseases on animals. The course will provide students with a series of
lectures and hands-on training laboratories. The lectures will focus on causes of animals’ disease, agents that causes the
diseases, the nature of the biological diseases, central concept of prevent, detect, respond, and recover. Prerequisites:
FAS 112 or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 270 ~
FAS 325 Fundamentals of Poultry Science – 3 credit hours. Basic course in poultry science that involves principles and practices
in production and marketing of poultry and poultry products in a highly specialized industry. Practice consists of handson application of basic skills required for efficient production and management. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 326 Poultry Production & Management – 3 credit hours. A comprehensive study of various management practices, including
brooding of broiler and replacement pullets, management of layers and other classes of poultry such as turkeys, geese,
ducks, and so forth. Emphasis will also be given to current practices in the poultry industry through visits to area
commercial operators. Nutrition and disease management will also be addressed. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 351 Nutrition and Metabolism – 3 credit hours. Introduction to nutrient digestion and metabolism in monogastrics and
ruminants. The students will become acquainted with physiological and biochemical mechanisms of nutrient utilization.
Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 102L, BIO 103, BIO 103L.
FAS 352 Feeds and Feeding – 3 credit hours. Introduction to livestock feeds and their utilization in meeting the nutrient
requirements of animals producing meat, milk fiber, and eggs. The student will become acquainted with ration
formulation and laboratory procedures for determining feed composition. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 353 Animal Breeding & Genetics – 3 credit hours. Concepts and principles of genetics applied to animal breeding, including
Mendelian inheritance, gametogenesis, molecular genetics, modes of gene action, inheritability estimation, progeny
testing methods, inbreeding and outbreeding systems, and recent advances in animal genetic engineering. Prerequisites:
BIO 103, BIO 103L, FAS 112.
FAS 354 Beef Cattle Production – 3 credit hours. Consideration of basic principles and methods of application involved in
breeding, feeding, management, diseases, and marketing of beef producing animals. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 355 Livestock Judging – 3 credit hours. Theoretical and practical techniques relative to the selection of farm animals based
on their physical attributes, the intent of which is to acquire the ability to recognize superior animals for breeding
purposes and to recognize those animals that will be outstanding producers of meat and milk for human consumption.
Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 356 Swine Production – 3 credit hours. Study of the basic principles and their practical application in efficient pork
production. All areas of production, breeding, selection, nutrition, housing, equipment, marketing, herd health, and
economic management are included. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 357 Monogastric Animal Management – 3 credit hours. This course will review the basic principles and their practical
application in efficient poultry and pork production. All areas of production, breeding, selection, nutrition, housing,
equipment, marketing, herd health, and economic management are included. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 358 Ruminant Animal Management – 3 credit hours. This is an introductory course with the purpose of providing an
overview of the beef and dairy industries and the scientific principles of beef and dairy production and management.
Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 401L Food Microbiology – 4 credit hours. A course on theoretical and practical studies of the role of microorganisms in foods
pertaining to processing, preservation, quality, product development and spoilage. Also, this course acquaints students
with quantitative and qualitative microbial evaluation techniques applicable to the food industry and science.
Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L.
FAS 402 (FAS 505) Meat & Poultry Science & Technology – 3 credit hours. Theoretical and practical aspects of slaughtering,
dressing, cutting, and processing of beef, pork, and lamb. Selection, identification, and utilization of wholesale and retail
cuts, as well as principles of processing and preservation of meat products are covered. Various methods of studying and
evaluating meat characteristics and composition are also included. Prerequisites: FAS 102, BIO 103, BIO 103L.
FAS 403 Seminar – 1 credit hour. A review and discussion of current literature in food science, food and nutrition, or animal
science areas. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
FAS 405 Special Problems – 1-3 credit hours. A detailed experimental study of a chosen problem in food science, animal science,
or related science areas. Prerequisites: Junior standing or instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 271 ~
FAS 407L Food Chemistry – 4 credit hours. A course on theoretical and practical applications focusing on chemistry of foods
chemical processing and interactions. Includes study of color, flavor and nutritive value. Prerequisites: FAS 102, CHE
221, CHE 221L.
FAS 408L Food Analysis – 4 credit hours. The use of physical and chemical methods of analyzing foods and their application to the
food and feed industry. Students apply principles to projects in a laboratory session. Prerequisites: (FAS 102 or FAS
112) and CHE 251, CHE 251L.
FAS 420 Dairy Production and Management - 3 credit hours. This course provides an evaluation of the complexity and dynamic
nature of the dairy industry and the science of producing milk for dairy cattle, goats and sheep. This course will
introduce students to the technological and genetic developments in dairy farming resulting in increased productivity.
Topics of discussion will include animal breeding, reproduction, nutrition, business, health, forage utilization and
marketing as related to the dairy industry. Prerequisite: BIO 103, BIO 103L, FAS 112.
FAS 421 Biology of Lactation – 3 credit hours. This is an introductory course that will provide the students with the basics and
advanced knowledge of the development, growth, and function of the mammary gland of dairy animals and lactation and
detailed the critical regulatory events in lactation. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 422 Poultry Products Technology – 3 credit hours. Procurement, processing, packaging and distribution of poultry products,
and factors affecting quality, their identification and control, quality maintenance, and storage are addressed.
Prerequisites: FAS 102.
FAS 424 Animal Models in Biomedical Research – 3 credit hours. This course looks at the use of laboratory animals,
recreational/companion animals, and food-producing animals in biomedical research concerning human and animal
health and diseases. Topics such as basic biology, common uses in biomedical research, and unique applications of
selected species will be emphasized. In addition, this course will talk about the advantages and limitations of given
models and regulations of biomedical uses of animals. Prerequisites: (BIO 101 and BIO 102) or BIO 103.
FAS 426 Public Health Significance of Zoonotic Diseases – 3 credit hours. This course addresses issues and concerns of infectious
disease transmissible from animal to man and from man to animal. Re-emerging zoonotic diseases and other relevant
issues on communicable diseases will also be addressed. Factors contributing to the emergence of zoonotic diseases
including the impact of social and demographic changes will be addressed. The etiology, incidence in man and animals,
nature of the disease, course of infection, mode of transmission, role of animals in the epidemiology, diagnosis and
control or eradication will be discussed. Prerequisite: BIO 103, BIO 103L, FAS 112.
FAS 430L Physiology of Reproduction – 4 credit hours. Study of early fetal development and differentiation of the gonads and
secondary sex organs. Anatomy and physiology of male and female reproductive tracts, endocrinology of reproduction,
fertilization, cleavage and implantation, pregnancy diagnosis and parturition, causes of reproductive failure, and the use
of artificial insemination and embryo transfer to improve reproductive efficiency are addressed in this course.
Prerequisites: BIO 103 and (senior standing or instructor consent).
FAS 440 Research Methods in Biosciences – 3 credit hours. Principles associated with research analysis in bioscience. To
understand various research methods using practical applications. Data collection, management and organization with
emphasis in population inferences, hypothesis testing, experimental units, scientific process and an introduction to
experimental designs in bio-health sciences. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
FAS 442 Fruits, Vegetables, & Cereal Products Technology – 4 credit hours. A course to provide students with an integrated
understanding of basic principles in relation to storage, preservation and utilization of fruits, vegetables, and cereals.
Experience is provided in developing appropriate information and applying it to the decision making process in food
industry situations. Prerequisites: FAS 102.
FAS 450 Regulations of Food Safety and Quality – 3 credit hours. The study of the history of food law; steps in establishing food
laws; food laws and regulation. Various agencies involved in enforcing food quality and product quality evaluation
methods will be presented to set forth examples of producers', processors', consumers' and regulators' concerns in
maintaining food quality levels. Prerequisites: FAS 102.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 272 ~
FAS 453L Agricultural Biochemistry – 4 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamentals of biochemistry with emphasis on food
and plant biochemistry. The laboratory deals with basic techniques in biochemical analyses. A laboratory session adds
practical experience to the theory taught. Prerequisites: CHE 251, CHE 251L.
FAS 460 Animal Anatomy & Physiology – 3 credit hours. Fundamental aspects of anatomy and physiology in a wide range of
domestic species. Provides in-depth information on the guiding principles of this key area of study for animal science
students, fostering a thorough understanding of the complex make-up of domestic animals. Incorporates practical
information, with descriptions of anatomic or physiological events in companion or domestic animals to demonstrate
everyday applications. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 461L Food Engineering – 4 credit hours. Fundamentals of heat transfer, fluid flow, evaporation, drying, and other unit
operations in food processing industries. Students will be acquainted with application of engineering principles and
concepts to the processing of foods. An integrated laboratory session provides demonstration of principles. Prerequisites:
PHY 201, MTH 125.
FAS 462 Animal Parasitology – 3 credit hours. This course will cover a wide range of topics related to diagnosing, treatment, and
preventing of companion and food animals from diseases. The course will be introduced with an overview of the scope
and nature of animal health disorders, including the threats diseases by viruses and bacteria agents. This will be followed
by a comprehensive scientific context and several lessons on specific systemic diseases on animals and an illustration of
the physiological impacts of the diseases on animals. The course will provide students with a series of lectures and
hands-on training laboratories. The lectures will focus on causes of animals’ parasitic disease, agents that cause the
diseases, the nature of the biological diseases, prevention and control. Prerequisites: FAS 320 or instructor consent.
FAS 472L Food Processing – 4 credit hours. A course involving the integration of basic principles and practices of unit operation
for food processing and preservation. Practical experience in food processing is afforded by an integrated laboratory
period. Prerequisites: FAS 102.
FAS 474 Science and Health Management of Small Ruminants – 3 credit hours. This course addresses specific management
approaches to production medicine, herd and flock health and reproduction in sheep and goats. Basic handling
techniques, body condition scoring, selection and breeding management, breeding soundness, epidemiological
approaches to herd and flock health parasite management, pregnancy diagnosis and management, antibiotic residue
considerations and methods of testing milk and meat, bio-safety, urolithiasis, geriatric considerations, control strategies
for managing chronic diseases and nutritional impact on animal health and wellbeing for sustainable small ruminant
production will be emphasized. Prerequisite: BIO 103, BIO 103L, FAS 112.
FAS 485 Animal Physiology and Endocrinology – 3 credit hours. This course will review endocrine systems, and hormonal
regulation and integration of physiological function in animal domestic species, from the molecular to the wholeorganism level. Prerequisites: FAS 112.
FAS 486 Food Biotechnology – 3 credit hours. The course provides an introduction to the application of biotechnology of food
production and processing. The topics covered will include applications of traditional biotechnology techniques,
discovering the DNA molecule, study of the DNA structure and function, introduction to recombinant DNA techniques,
genetically modified foods on the market and benefits, risk analysis and labeling. Prerequisites: BIO 103, BIO 103L.
FAS 487 Nutrigenomics – 3 credit hours. This course is aimed at providing food science students with firsthand knowledge of the
integration of food science, genetics and molecular biology. The course will focus on the cellular and molecular basis of
food related diseases and nutrient-gene interactions. Prerequisites: FAS 351, FAS 453.
FAS 490 Food Science Capstone – 3 credit hours. A senior level course which incorporates and unifies the principles of food
chemistry, food microbiology, food engineering, food processing, nutrition, sensory analysis and statistics. Prerequisites:
Senior standing.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Food Science program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
FAS 491 Animal Health Internship – 2 credit hours. This course is designed with the purpose of enabling animal bio-health
science students of applying entry-level competencies acquired in the classroom setting to animal bio-health practice
through hands-on activities. This will be achieved through exposing the students to career-related work experiences
during college. This will benefit the students by allowing them to gain comfort and confidence in job performance, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 273 ~
explore compatibility with specific career opportunities, and become more mature professionally. Lectures and
presentations conducted by the instructor and invited speakers will be used in preparing the students for internships with
various host agencies and animal health organizations. Prerequisites: FAS 112 or instructor consent.
FAS 492 Animal Bio-Health Sciences Capstone – 3 credit hours. A senior level course incorporating and unifying the principles of
animal breeding, genetics, animal nutrition, biology and chemistry with livestock production and care. Prerequisites:
Senior standing.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Animal Bio-Health Sciences program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
Family & Consumer Sciences
FCS 101 Introduction to the Profession – 1 credit hour. General overview of Family and Consumer Sciences-its areas, its history,
growth and expansion. Careers are also investigated. Prerequisites: None.
FCS 303 Career Technical/Family and Consumer Sciences Education – 3 credit hours. A survey of career technical programs as
taught in secondary schools with special emphasis on Family and Consumer Sciences. State required occupational
practicum must be culminated during this course. Prerequisites: FCS 101.
FCS 401 Family and Consumer Sciences Education – 3 credit hours. Planning and implementation of curricula in secondary
schools and community programs, making use of innovations and technology in the teaching-learning process. The
course also provides for the development and use of appropriate evaluation tools and techniques. Prerequisites: FCS 101,
FCS 303.
FCS 411 Honors Courses in Family and Consumer Sciences – 3 credit hours. A special problems course for academically
accelerated students which explores issues and trends in specialized areas, with some opportunity for research.
Prerequisites: Senior standing, FCS major, GPA. of 3.3 or above.
FCS 418 Directed Field Experience – 6 credit hours. One hundred twenty (120) hours of off-campus, supervised experiential
learning in the student’s area of concentration. Prerequisites: (Advanced junior or senior standing) and instructor
consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Family & Consumer Sciences program. Therefore, students majoring in
this program cannot substitute this course.
FCS 420 Senior Seminar – 1 credit hour. A course which assists students in fusing the various aspects of Family and Consumer
Sciences into a meaningful whole through the study of relevant issues and interaction with professionals. Personal and
professional skills needed for success in students’ chosen careers are stressed. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Family & Consumer Sciences program. Therefore, students majoring in
this program cannot substitute this course.
FCS 495 Internship in FCS – 12 credit hours. Supervised observation and teaching in a secondary school. A critical analysis of
classroom problems and activities provides major topics of the seminar. Prerequisites: FCS 101, FCS 303, FCS 401.
Education Foundation
FED 200 Introduction to Teacher Education – 2 credit hours. A general overview of teaching in public schools with a supervised
practicum. The course is designed as a personalized exploration of the profession for those students interested in teaching
as a possible career and anxious for an accurate picture of what is entailed in teaching in American schools today as well
as the qualities and skills required for those who teach. 2-hour lab requirement for Pre-Elementary, Elementary and
Collaborative Teacher K-6 and 6-12 until candidates demonstrate a passing score on Praxis II. Prerequisites: 2.75 Grade
Point Average.
FED 203 Academic Skills for Educators – 0 credit hour (3 clock hours per week). This course includes three modules of core
academic skills for educators in reading, writing, and mathematics. Module 1 includes reading strategies of key ideas,
main details, craft, structure, and language skills. Writing Module 2 incorporates text types, purposes, productions,
language and research skills for writing. Module 3 consist of mathematics that includes number and quantity, algebra and
functions, geometry, statistics and probability. The course is supplemented with electronic software to track the progress
of students towards readiness for taking the Praxis Core examination. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 274 ~
FED 212 Human Growth and Development – 3 credit hours. A study of the ontogenesis of human growth and learning from
adolescence to young adulthood. Emphasis is placed on the cause and effect interrelationship between natural growth
and maturational processes and environmental forces, influences, and expectations. Prerequisites: PSY 201, 2.75 Grade
Point Average.
FED 215 Instructional Technology – 3 credit hours. A course designed to emphasize traditional current and emerging instructional
technology in the classroom. Students will learn various techniques for designing instructional materials, applying and
integrating technology in instruction, and using microcomputer and software applications to promote effective teaching
and learning. The course offers pre-service teachers the opportunity to design lessons, select appropriate media formats,
and conduct informal and formal evaluations on the effectiveness of selected media on the learning process. Also,
students will become knowledgeable of educational applications in both microcomputer platforms Macintosh and
Windows. Prerequisites: 2.75 Grade Point Average.
FED 300 Foundations of Education – 2 credit hours. A study of the growth and development of education in the United States,
together with a consideration of the effects of the purpose of education on organization administration curriculum, and
teaching procedures. Two hour lab requirement for Secondary Education majors until candidates demonstrate a passing
score on Praxis II. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
FED 404 Assessment & Evaluation – 3 credit hours. This course introduces teacher education candidates to current and emerging
methods in assessment and evaluation. Candidates are exposed to a variety of assessment techniques including the
planning, development, administration, and the scoring of traditional and alternative assessments. This course will
emphasize fair and equitable assessment strategies that could be used to analyze student learning and to evaluate if
learning goals have been met. Candidates will be provided with an overview of the role of assessment in instruction, how
to use a variety of assessment strategies to evaluate preconceptions, confront and address naïve conceptions, evaluate
ideas that students hold or understandings that students have formulated, and the importance of collecting, organizing,
analyzing, and reflecting on various types of assessment evidence to improve teaching and to determine if student
knowledge has been gained and/or corrected on a level beyond memorization. A field experience is required for this
course. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
Finance
FIN 315 Principles of Finance – 3 credit hours. A study of how corporations raise and utilize funds, the kinds of securities and
principles involved in the above processes, and the analytical techniques employed by financial managers to appraise the
capital - raising and fund-allocation activities. Prerequisites: None.
FIN 316 Managerial Finance – 3 credit hours. The financial manager’s responsibilities for determining optimal policies and
procedures for capital budgeting under conditions of uncertainty; long term financing, dividend distribution, mergers and
acquisitions and working capital management. A problem solving and/or case study approach is used but not to the
exclusion of probing theoretical questions. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 317 Computer Analysis in Finance – 3 credit hours. The use of different software packages in analyzing decision making by
financial managers. Emphasis will be placed on problem solving in the areas of risk and return, capital budgeting, cost of
capital, capital structure, loan amortization, and time value of money. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Finance – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the form of
a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related to the
student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development Services
(CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The student’s
faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to receive
ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
FIN 412 Risk and Insurance – 3 credit hours. Basic ideas, problems, and principles found in all types of modern-day insurance
and other methods of handling risks as well as risk management as it directly affects the family, businesses, and society
as a whole. Prerequisites: FIN 315. (Offered upon sufficient demand, consult your advisor.)
FIN 432 Investment – 3 credit hours. Public and corporate securities, capital markets, and analytical skills used to evaluate stocks,
bonds, and may other types of investments in terms of their income and growth prospects from the standpoint of
individual and institutional investors. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 275 ~
FIN 431 Personal Financial Planning – 3 credit hours. The course covers the theories, practices and methodology used in planning
and controlling personal financial decisions to achieve short and long term financial security. It emphasizes individual
savings, budget management, credit management, banking practices, real estate transactions, tax planning, investment
practices, risk management with insurance, and retirement planning. Pre-requisites: FIN 315.
FIN 433 Investment in Practice I – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 434 Investment in Practice II – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 435 Investment in Practice III – 1 credit hour. Students manage an investment portfolio. They trade stocks through a broker.
This is not a game, but the management of real money. Students apply their knowledge of portfolio management and
investment theory in making these decisions. Student may repeat the course one or two times. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 442 Investments II – 3 credit hours. Investments II is the second course in a two-course sequence that provides a
comprehensive understanding of the key concepts, practices, and application of theory used to make investment
decisions. This course focuses on fixed income securities; security analysis, and options, futures and other derivatives.
Students will rely on basic and advanced analytical tools to understand and use empirical evidence to make investment
decisions. Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) Investment Challenge will be a significant component of the course for
students to learn the application of investment principles. Prerequisites: FIN 432.
FIN 449 Money and Capital Market – 3 credit hours. Financing process and the role of the financial markets, aggregate
investment and savings, money and capital markets, and the flow of funds; determination of asset prices and
interrelationships among them; role of financial intermediaries and the impact of their portfolio policy. Prerequisites:
FIN 315.
FIN 471 Financial Markets and Institutions – 3 credit hours. The course consists of two parts: the markets and the institutions.
The first part will cover individual financial markets. Beginning with a quick review on interest rate and valuation, it will
cover almost all major financial markets: the fixed-income market, the money market, the stock market and the mortgage
market. The focus on the second part of this course will explore different financial institutions: what they are and how
they function. Coverage includes the Federal Reserve, commercial banks, mutual funds, hedge funds, investment banks,
private equities, and venture capital firms. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 479 Derivative Markets – 3 credit hours. Functions, techniques, and the valuation of derivative securities, such as futures,
forward and options markets. Primary emphasis is on pricing and methods of trading. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 484 Bank Management – 3 credit hours. The financial management of banks. Emphasis is placed on deposits, loans, bond
portfolios, credit analysis, analysis and interpretation of federal reserve regulations and publications. Prerequisites: FIN
315.
FIN 487 International Financial Management – 3 credit hours. Optimum decision making in a global business environment. The
course is multidimensional, requiring considerations of social, economic and political factors in addition to traditional
(intrafirm) managerial concerns. Prerequisites: FIN 315.
FIN 489 Special Topics in Finance – 3 credit hours. Current issues and problem relating to corporate finance along with
computer-assisted techniques and methods used to select, administer and change the financial decisions. Prerequisites:
FIN 316.
French
FRE 101 Elementary French I – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamentals of oral-aural and reading-writing usage in the
language. Grammatical structure, conversational form, and various aspects of the French culture are important parts of
the course. Students learn to use the spoken language and work on production from the beginning. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 276 ~
FRE 102 Elementary French II – 3 credit hours. This course is a continuation of FRE 101. The basic language skills (speaking,
reading, writing, and listening) introduced in FRE 101, along with some aspects of French culture, will be emphasized to
complete the introductory level. Prerequisites: FRE 101.
FRE 201 Intermediate French I – 3 credit hours. A continuation of the first-year course. Improved proficiencies in oral-aural and
reading-writing skills and increased linguistic proficiency will be stressed. Humanistic understanding of French people
will be emphasized through the reading of historical or cultural texts in French. Prerequisites: FRE 102.
FRE 202 Intermediate French II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of FRE 201 which includes intensive reading of French literary
and cultural texts. Emphasis is placed on vocabulary expansion, speaking and writing short compositions in French.
Prerequisites: FRE 201.
FRE 301 Advanced French I – 3 credit hours. A logical continuation of the second-year course. Further attention is given to oralaural and reading-writing skills. Problems of grammar are approached at a high level. Syntactic constructions and rules,
and the study of some idiomatic usage of the language are also included. Prerequisites: FRE 202.
FRE 302 Advanced French II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of French 301. Students will continue to develop their audio-lingual
and written skills, with reading and presentation of grammar and syntax. The course is designed to develop fluency in
spoken French through guided and free conversation on topics of personal, general and current interest. Prerequisites:
FRE 301.
FRE 303 Introduction to French Literature I – 3 credit hours. A broad study of the historical and aesthetic evolution in literature
from the earliest medieval literary monuments through the great masterworks of the Age of Enlightenment. Students will
read carefully selected samples of representative works from all of the genres and important periods. Prerequisites: FRE
202.
FRE 304 Introduction to French Literature II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of FRE 303. The course provides a broad study of
the historical and aesthetic evolution in literature from the Age of Enlightenment through the contemporary period. The
main literary currents and their historical and social backgrounds will be studied. Prerequisites: FRE 303.
Geography
GEO 213 Principles of Geography – 3 credit hours. An introductory course that deals with the fundamentals of geography as a
science, including physical, urban, political, social, economic, and demographic aspects of geography. It also focuses on
the use of maps and the geographical information system as tools of geographers. Prerequisites: None.
GEO 214 World Regional Geography – 3 credit hours. A study which includes the geographical profile of world nations and major
regions focusing on the relationship of cultural and environmental factors. Emphasis is given to the study of Third World
countries. Prerequisites: None.
GEO 215 Global Profile – 3 credit hours. A course designed to help students become aware of global realities and concerns and
help them understand the gravity of the world’s future problems, particularly global population, resources, urbanization
and technological development. Prerequisites: None.
GEO 315 Political Geography – 3 credit hours. Political Geography examines the ways in which human have arranged the territory
of the earth’s surface. This course examines the effects of political actions on social and economic conditions, and with
the significance of geological factors behind political situations, problems, and conflicts. Prerequisites: None.
GEO 401 Urban Geography – 3 credit hours. Explanation of various concepts of urban geography and the role of geographic site
and location in the evolution of cities. The course includes study of global urbanization, urban hierarchy, morphology,
land use patterns, classification of cities and town-country relations. A special focus on slums and squatters in
developing countries is included. Prerequisites: None.
Human Development & Family Study
HDF 201 Family Relations – 3 credit hours. A study of human relationships, including dating and mate selection, marriage, family
life, and parenting as well as laying the foundation for a fundamental philosophy of productive human interaction.
Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 277 ~
HDF 211 Child Growth and Development – 3 credit hours. A study of the ontogenesis of human growth and learning from
conception to young adulthood. Emphasis is placed on the cause and effect interrelationship between natural growth and
maturational processes and environmental forces, influence, and expectations. Special emphasis is placed upon birth to
age nine. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 301 Fundamentals of Family Financial Planning – 3 credit hours. Introduces students to the various financial planning topics
that face families, such as the financial planning process, client/planner interactions, time value of money applications,
personal financial statements, cash flow and debt management, asset acquisition, and education planning. Risk
management, investment planning, retirement planning, plan integration, and ethics are also discussed. Prerequisites:
ECO 200 or (ECO 231 and ECO 232).
HDF 303 Family Theory – 3 credit hours. Theory related to development and functions of families. Attention is also given to
family systems that enhance or retard achievement of goals. Prerequisites: HDF 201.
HDF 304 Parenting – 3 credit hours. The nature of parenthood and the task of parenting in today’s culture through the various
stages of the child’s metamorphosis to maturity and beyond. Incorporates new knowledge, skills, and practices in
effective parenting. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 305 Insurance Planning for Families – 3 credit hours. Introduces students to risk management and insurance decisions in
family financial planning. Topics include insurance for life, health, disability, property and liability risks, as well as
annuities, group insurance, and long term care. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 306 Middle Childhood and Adolescence – 3 credit hours. A study of the child between the ages of nine and eighteen, in all
phases of development as the change occurs from child to adult. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 307 Motor-Perceptual Development in Early Childhood – 3 credit hours. A study of how a child learns to perceive through
the instrumentality of his or her body. Laboratory experience to be arranged. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 308 Guidance in Prepared Environments – 3 credit hours. A study of direct and indirect guidance where the environment is
arranged in such a manner that the equipment and materials facilitate each child’s progress and discovery. Prerequisites:
None.
HDF 310 Infant and Toddler Development – 3 credit hours. Research and new insights in the field of infant and toddler
development, the effects of the infant care-giver, interaction, and societal supports. Opportunities for observation and
research, including a laboratory which focuses on assessing infant development are included. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 311 Theories of Child and Adolescent Development – 3 credit hours. Current theories and philosophies in the field of human
development which shed light on the marvels and mysteries of the human creature in his being and becoming are
addressed. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 312 Family Economics and Resource Management – 3 credit hours. A study of the management of family resources,
including credit, buymanship, and consumer issues, augmented with supervised learning experiences. Prerequisites:
None.
HDF 314 Family and Society – 3 credit hours. A study of the socialization process of individuals and families in various cultures
in North America and abroad, with emphasis on the humanizing or degenerating influences of the twentieth century.
Prerequisites: None.
HDF 315 Income Tax Planning for Families – 3 credit hours. Provides an overview of current tax laws, income tax principles, and
taxation terminology. The course focuses on tax planning considerations, computations, and tax planning strategies
including tax pitfalls that impact financial planning for families. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 317 Child Development Programs and the Community – 3 credit hours. An emphasis on the establishment and
implementation of wholesome relationships among the child development program, community, home, and family
toward the enhancement of educational opportunities for children. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 318 Workshop – 3-6 credit hours. Selected topics in Human Development and Family Studies. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 278 ~
HDF 401 Family Financial Counseling – 3 credit hours. A study of counseling techniques relevant to the financial planning and
economic well-being of the family. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 402 Preschool Curriculum Development – 3 credit hours. Opportunities for students to design curricula to meet the needs of
preschool children. Special attention is given to language arts, mathematics, and social studies concepts. Prerequisites:
HDF 211.
HDF 405 Investment Planning for Families – 3 credit hours. Provides the student with an understanding of the various types of
securities trades in financial markets, investment theory and practice, portfolio construction and management, and
investment strategies and tactics to meet a family’s investment goals. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 406 Retirement Planning for Families – 3 credit hours. The intent of this course is to provide families with knowledge of both
public and private retirement plans. The public plans include Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. The private plans
include defined benefit and defined contribution plans and their regulatory provisions. The specifics of the various plans
are analyzed as well as non-qualified deferred compensation plans. Finally, issues that individuals and families face in
retirement, such as lifestyle choices and medical issues are discussed. Prerequisites: None.
HDF 407 Estate Planning for Families – 3 credit hours. The course focuses on the efficient conversation and transfer of wealth,
consistent with the family’s goal. It is a study of the legal, tax, financial and non-financial aspects of this process,
covering topics such as trusts, wills probate, advanced directives, charitable giving, wealth transfers and related taxes.
Prerequisites: None.
HDF 410 Readings and Research in Human Development and Family Studies – 3 credit hours. An exploration into the writings
and research of well-known contributors to the study of human development and the family. Prerequisites: Junior or
senior standing.
HDF 411 Infant Programs – 3 credit hours. A study of the organization and implementation of infant programs with emphasis on
planning for cognitive, psychomotor and social development. Prerequisites: HDF 211.
HDF 412 Independent Study – 1-3 credit hours. A course providing an opportunity for students to pursue an avenue of special
interest to the student and experience some creative expressions in response to the work of others. Prerequisites: None
HDF 413 Behavior Management in the School – 3 credit hours. The study of the basic understanding of children’s behavior, based
on age/stage characteristics. Provided are theoretical understanding and practical applications of child guidance
techniques in group settings. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
HDF 415 Assessment in Human Development and Family – 3 credit hours. An analysis and evaluation of individual screening and
assessment instruments for use with individuals and families throughout the life cycle. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
HDF 416 Program Development – 3 credit hours. An emphasis on scope, organization, implementation, and evaluation of
programs for community and cooperative extension. Methods and techniques of designing program materials are also
included. Prerequisites: None.
Health Education
HED 101 Personal and Community Health – 2 credit hours. A course designed to broaden the candidate’s background regarding
facts and the principles necessary in the solution of several health issues. This course surveys a number of problems
affecting individual, family, and community health including infectious diseases and STD’s, First Aid, alcohol and drug
abuse, consumer education, and nutrition. Prerequisites: None.
HED 401 Substance Abuse & HIV/AIDS – 3 credit hours. A survey of alcohol and other drugs (AOD), and HIV/AIDS facts.
Information will be provided on the short-and long-term effects of AOD and HIV/AIDS on the body, incidences of AOD
use/addiction and HIV/AIDS, and symptoms of AOD involvement and HIV/AIDS. Biological, social and behavioral
factors affecting addiction and treatment of AOD and HIV/AIDS will be discussed. Resource information will be
provided on community services for people who are addicted to AOD, and people with HIV/AIDS. Prerequisites: None.
History
HIS 101 World History I – 3 credit hours. A survey of the evolution of civilization with an effort to show the interrelationship of
all cultures from earliest times (Pre-History) through the 15th century. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 279 ~
HIS 101E World History I Enriched – 4 credit hours (3 clock hour lecture and 1 clock hour lab per week). A survey of the
evolution of civilization with an effort to show the interrelationships of all cultures from earliest times (Pre-History)
through the 15th century. In addition to regular course work, students are required to attend on-hour tutorial sessions/labs
each week conducted in cooperation with the Tutorial Assistance Network (TAN) in the Freshman Academy. Approval
from the Freshman Academy and consent of the instructor is required for enrollment in this class.
HIS 101H World History I Honors – 3 credit hours. A survey of the evolution of civilization with an effort to show the
interrelationship of all cultures from earliest times (Pre-History) through the 15th century. Prerequisites: None. Approval
for enrollment in this course is required from the Director of the Honors Program and instructor consent.
HIS 102 World History II – 3 credit hours. A survey of the evolution of civilization with an effort to show the interrelationship of
all cultures from 1500 through the present. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 102H World History II Honors – 3 credit hours. A survey of the evolution of civilization with an effort to show the
interrelationship of all cultures from 1500 through the present. Prerequisites: None. Approval for enrollment in this
course is required from the Director of the Honors Program and instructor consent.
HIS 105 Contemporary World History – 3 credit hours. A course exploring major developments throughout the world from World
War II to the present. It includes such topics as Cold War, African and Asian nationalism, Third World development,
United Nations, economic disparity between north and south, disintegration of communist Europe, as well as
technological, intellectual, and cultural developments in the period. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 201 American History I – 3 credit hours. A study of the political, economic, social and religious development of the United
States from the earliest settlements to 1877. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 202 American History II – 3 credit hours. A study of the political, economic, social and religious development of the United
States from 1877 through the present. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 204 Intro to African-American History – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the African-American history which surveys
experience of Africans in America from their arrival in the 1600s, through slavery, Reconstruction, the Civil Rights era,
to the present day. The emphasis is on gaining a critical understanding of key events and situations that have shaped
African-American life and culture. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 207 Africana Studies – 3 credit hours. A course dealing with the basic origin and orientation of the study of the African
American experience. It is concerned with the relationships between African American Studies, Africana Studies, and
other related fields of study. Its focus is a multi-dimensional and interdisciplinary perspective and approach to the
African American experience. The emphasis is placed on ideas and developments that have influenced and shaped
African American studies and its relation to African and diaspora studies. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
HIS 205 The Historical Essay: An Introduction to Creative Historical Thinking and Writing – 3 credit hours. A course designed to
develop historical thinking and writing skills through the use of primary documents. The core of the course involves the
examination of primary documents that reflect a broad variety of history. Activities include analyzing and interpreting
primary documents; writing historical background to primary documents; and constructing historical context, with
emphasis on fictional and non-fictional historical events, movements and individuals. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 206 Alabama History – 3 credit hours. A study of the historical development of Alabama and its relationship to the growth of
the United States as a whole. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
HIS 301 English History I – 3 credit hours. A survey of the political, cultural, and social development of England from pre-history
through 1688. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 302 English History II – 3 credit hours. A survey of the political, cultural, and social development of England, the Empire
and the Commonwealth of Nations from 1689 through the present. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 280 ~
HIS 303 History of Africa – 3 credit hours. An introduction to African history which surveys its main periods or phases.
Beginning with the geography of the continent, the origin of man and the peopling of Africa, it goes from ancient Egypt
to colonization. The emphasis is on events and underlying forces impacting the development and history of Africa as a
whole. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 304 Studies in African-American History – 3 credit hours. A survey of critical events and developments in African American
history for Political Science majors and History minors. It covers the period from the first arrival of Africans in North
America to the present day with special emphasis on the development of slavery, emancipation and Reconstruction,
segregation and the Civil Rights era, and recent developments. It emphasizes the analysis of primary sources produced
by African-Americans to understand the unique experience and perspective of Blacks in American society. Prerequisites:
HIS 201 or HIS 202.
HIS 305 Modern Asia – 3 credit hours. A study of the interrelationship of the Western nations with the countries of Asia.
Prerequisites: None.
HIS 306 The American Frontier and West – 3 credit hours. An examination on the western frontier from colonial period to 1890
with an emphasis on the political, cultural, environmental, social, economic, and military processes that shaped westward
expansion and American civilization. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 310 Historiography – 3 credit hours. An examination of history as a discipline. The course emphasis is on how historians
make sense of the past, the use of sources as evidence, historical research and writing, the relationship of history to other
disciplines, historical techniques, and the uses of history. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 315 Military History – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the study of conflicts in arms, campaigns and battles, beginning
with the colonial and European heritage. A thorough review is provided of the American Revolution, the War of 1812,
the Mexican War, the Civil War, the Army and the Indian Wars, World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the U.S.
Army in Vietnam and later conflicts. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 397 Program Seminar I – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to departmental majors. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 398 Program Seminar II – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to departmental majors. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 400 Foundations of American Republic – 3 credit hours. The course examines American historical events and circumstances
from the revolutionary era through 1820s. Class emphasis is on the American Revolution, Constitution, creation of a
national government, federalism, political parties formation, republican ideology, democracy, and the War of 1812.
Prerequisites: None.
HIS 402 History of Latin America – 3 credit hours. An introduction to Latin American history starting with the geography of the
cultural region and its earliest people and going to the national period. The focus is on those events impacting the
development and institutions of the region as a whole. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 403 Modern Europe – 3 credit hours. The history of modern Europe from World War I to the present, with emphasis on the
Treaty of Versailles, League of Nations, rise and fall of totalitarian governments, World War II, United Nations, the Cold
War and the confrontation between East and West. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 405 American Diplomacy – 3 credit hours. A study of the forces which have influenced decisions in the United States’
relationships with other peoples. The colonial background, federalist, and republican leadership, territorial expansion,
the Civil War, Seward, Fish, and Blaine, the rise of imperialism, the Far East, Latin America, World Wars I and II, and
the Cold War are all covered. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 406 20th Century U.S. – 3 credit hours. The historic development of the United States as it moved into the ranks of the great
world powers. Concentrates on social and economic reform and foreign policy. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 407 Constitutional History of the U.S. – 3 credit hours. An analysis of the growth and development of the American
constitutional system, with particular emphasis upon the post-World War II period. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 281 ~
HIS 408 History of the South Since 1865 – 3 credit hours. An emphasis on Reconstruction Redemption, the New South, the
Populist and Progressive Movements, the impact of two world wars, the Depression, the Intellectual Renaissance, TVA,
Civil Rights, the Black Movements, the Labor Movement, and the South and the nation. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 409 U.S. Reconstruction – 3 credit hours. The transformation of American society and government during the post-Civil War
years with special emphasis on the problems of the South. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 496 History Internship and Co-op Program – 3-6 credit hours. An emphasis on the application of historical research methods
and principles of public history to non-academic careers through observation and practical experience. Prerequisites:
Completion of 21 semester hours in upper level history courses.
HIS 497 Program Seminar I – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 498 Program Seminar II – 0.5 credit hours. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
HIS 499 Senior History Seminar – 3 credit hours. An investigation of the problems and methods of historical research and
writing. Prerequisites: Completion of 21 semester hours in upper level history courses.
Health & Physical Education
HPE 300 Knowledge Content for Teaching Health and Physical Education – 2 credit hours. This is a capstone course that is
required for, and restricted to, Health and Physical Education majors that are in the teaching field for physical education.
Teacher candidates must take this course at any time after their freshman year but prior to, their senior year. The course
consists of two 1-hour meetings each week. Sections are limited to 30 students.
HPE 301 Administration in Health and Physical Education– 3 credit hours. A course designed to assist students in developing an
insight into the meaning and organizational skills required for organizing and administering programs of physical
education and/or other related programs. Specific strategies for selection, supervision, and evaluation of personnel,
budgeting, and space utilization are included. The conduct of programs within legal limits is given significant
consideration.
HPE 304 Kinesiology – 3 credit hours. A course providing a broad background regarding mechanical and muscular aspects of
human motion. In addition, the course provides the student with a laboratory component to ensure a means for
application and analysis. Prerequisites: BIO 101, BIO 101L, BIO 221, BIO 221L, HED 101.
HPE 312 Assessments and Evaluations in PE – 3 credit hours. A study of the use of tests, measurements, and evaluation
techniques for the formative and summative assessment of fitness development, skill development, cognitive learning,
and affective behaviors in physical education and sports, and other related fields. Laboratory experiences and
computerized assessment strategies will be included. Knowledge and use of Bloom’s Taxonomy are also expected.
Prerequisites: None.
HPE 325 Emergency Response – 3 credit hours. Development of the knowledge and skills necessary to work as a first responder in
an emergency to help sustain life, reduce pain, and minimize the consequences of injury or sudden illness until more
advanced medical help can arrive.
HPE 420 Research in Health and Physical Education – 3 credit hours. A comprehensive based description of teaching research in
Physical Education. This course brings to bear the important principles connected to teaching activity and movement in
education. Its focus is on understanding and grasping the unique variables, which makes for effective and efficient
teaching in the gym.
Humanities
HUM 300 The Rhetoric of Hip Hop, 3 credit hours. The course introduces students to the skills required for message analysis. The
course specifically focuses on the hip-hip community with emphasis as to how that community was formed and how it
continues to grow. Students will also be introduced to varying rhetorical concepts such as ethos, pathos, logos, emergent
grammar, etc. Students will understand how to dissect arguments made through artistic mediums and construct their own
arguments through work with argument theory. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 282 ~
HUM 301 Film and Culture – 3 credit hours. In this course, students view, discuss, and write about films which focus on life style
and cultural themes from selected less known non-western regions. Special emphasis will be placed on areas of social
conflict including gender, freedom of expression, perceptions about the West, and attitudes towards the past.
Prerequisites: ENG 203 or ENG 204.
HUM 320 The Literature and Culture of Brazil – 3 credit hours. This course will introduce students to the literature and culture of
Brazil through the arts (music, painting, architecture, film, dance) from the 17th to 20th century. The course focuses
mainly on colonial artistic expressions (e.g., poetry and Baroque art) as well as modern cultural productions.
Prerequisites: Instructor consent or junior standing.
HUM 407 Senior Seminar – 3 credit hours. Provide in-depth exploration and discussion of selected theoretical and critical topics.
Every participant focuses on one particular theoretical and geographical area. The course serves as a capstone for the
Cultural Studies major. Prerequisites: ENG 203 or ENG 204.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Cultural Studies program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
Honors Independent Study
IDS 301 Honors Seminar – 1 credit hour. A course placing selected current events, issues and problems in perspective through an
analysis of their origins and their development over time. Students will explore these events, issues, and problems indepth with special emphasis given to those of particular interest to the class. Required of all junior-level Honors Program
participants.
IDS 401 Senior Honors Project – 3 credit hours. This is a comprehensive culminating activity in which students demonstrate
essential knowledge, skills, and appreciation of their field(s) of study. The nature of the project will depend on the
discipline, (i.e., paintings, pottery, musical composition/recitals, original literary works, films/videotapes, and traditional
investigative/research projects). Research projects will be supervised by honors faculty and departmental faculty.
Industrial Technology
INT 101 Printing History and Typography – 3 credit hours. This course places emphasis on the study and practice of type and
typography combined with a rich social and technological evolution. Prerequisites: None.
INT 102 Introduction to Industrial Technology – 3 credit hours. This course emphasizes the four basic technology systems
(manufacturing, construction, communication, transportation) and emerging concepts and principles in bio-related
technologies. Prerequisites: None.
INT 105L Principles of Graphic Communications – 3 credit hours. This course provides a thorough introduction to graphic
communications, printing processes and focuses on digital printing and electronic pre-press systems. Prerequisites:
None.
INT 106 Image Conversion – 3 credit hours. This course places emphasis on the process of photographic processing for black and
white copy; introduction to color applications, film assembly, platemaking, and quality control. Prerequisite: None.
INT 107 Industrial Materials and Processes I – 3 credit hours. A basic course in machining technology and metallurgy. Step by
step procedures used to provide instruction on how to turn raw metallic materials into useful products. Prerequisites:
None.
INT 108 Industrial Materials and Processes II – 3 credit hours. Continuation of INT 107. Prerequisites: INT 107.
INT 201 Printing History &Typography – 3 credit hours. This course places emphasis on the study and practice of type and
typography combined with a rich social and technological evolution. Prerequisite: None.
INT 205 Power and Energy Systems – 3 credit hours. A basic study of energy sources. Means of harnessing and transmitting
energy and the effects of power systems. Prerequisites: PHY 201, PHY 201.
INT 206 Computer Applications in Technology Management – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to the
computer and its use in industrial technology, technical education, and technology education. Emphasis is placed on the
computer and its terminology, applications, networking, troubleshooting, ethics, trends, and safe handling/operation of
hardware, software and supplies. Students gain hands-on experience in the use of the computer application software, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 283 ~
with emphasis on word processing, PowerPoint presentation, and Excel spreadsheet applications as problem solving
tools in technology management. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
INT 207 CAD/CAM – 3 credit hours. This a basic course in computer-aided design and manufacturing. Topics include geometric
modeling, computer graphics, product design and development, product manufacturing and management. Use of the
computer is required. Prerequisites: INT 102.
INT 210 Manufacturing and Machine Tools Operation – 3 credit hours. A laboratory-based course covering precision
measurement, screw threads, cutting tool materials, cutting fluids, machinability of metals, the selection and production
of metals, basic metallurgical theory, and heat treatment. Prerequisites: INT 108.
INT 213 Offset Image Transfer – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of offset presswork; preparation of the press, one color presswork;
methods of offset presswork, including press preparation, film assembly, platemaking, make-ready, press running;
mechanism and upkeep; running difficult papers and forms; and multi-color work. Prerequisites: INT 105, [(CHE 101
and CHE 101L) or (CHE 111 and CHE 111L)].
INT 214 Advanced Offset Image Transfer – 3 credit hours. This course includes all aspects of printing production using
conventional and digital printing. Covers silk screen printing on various substrates. Prerequisites: INT 213.
INT 217 Graphic Design & Planning – 3 credit hours. This course places emphasis on four main goals; first to provide students
with a comprehensive foundation in design; second, to address basic problems and applications in the graphic design and
advertising; third, to encourage students to explore the disciplining to graphic design; and fourth, to explore various
graphic design applications such as CDs, packages, logos, posters, and etc. Students will utilize magazines, the computer
lab, and other printed materials in this class for the various projects. Prerequisites: INT 206.
INT 301 Printing Estimating – 3 credit hours. A study of the responsibility of the estimator in the printing plant and the
importance of estimating; estimating various kinds of composition, presswork, paper, and other cost elements which
enter into the production of typical jobs. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
INT 303 Transportation Systems Technologies – 3 credit hours. An investigation of transportation systems. Emphasis is placed on
air, land, water, and space travel and power/energy systems employed in transportation technology. Careers, concepts,
processes and applications relating to transportation, power and energy are explored. Prerequisites: INT 205 or MET
200.
INT 304 Manufacturing Organization and Management – 3 credit hours. A study of the organization and management of
resources and systems in the manufacturing industry. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
INT 305 Bio-Related Systems Technology – 2 credit hours. An exploratory study of the developments in the field of bio-related
technologies with emphasis on health-related, medical, ergonomics, agri-bio-technologies, and environmental
management technologies. The perspective of issues on the environment, individual, society and an analysis of
innovations are investigated. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
INT 306 Multimedia and Communication Technologies – 3 credit hours. The course covers subjects related to the transmission of
information via various communication modes to include audio and visual, computer multimedia and animation, and
data communication. A laboratory-based course designed to provide persons interested in teaching technology education
a working knowledge of various modes of communication. Prerequisites: INT 105, INT 206.
INT 307 Printing Management – 3 credit hours. This course places emphasis in leadership, planning, organizing, and maintaining
a printing plant or any other production plant, including organization and operations of various departments, layout of a
shop, equipment selection, materials and location. Also, it focuses on the analysis of printing cost procedures. A
breakdown of how to determine the cost of materials, equipment and human activity. Prerequisites: INT 217.
INT 308 Printing Inks & Substrates – 3 credit hours. The study of the relationship of inks, papers and other substrates use to
produce the printed image. Emphasis is on types of paper used in the printing and production processes, ink colors and
mixing color combinations. Prerequisites: INT 314, [(CHE 101 and CHE 101L) or (CHE 111 and CHE 111L)].
INT 309 Product Design and Development – 3 credit hours. A study of processes, procedures and techniques of designing and
developing consumer products. Prerequisites: INT 107 or INT108.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 284 ~
INT 310 Production Cost Analysis – 3 credit hours. Theory and principles of financial project analyses for making financial
decisions on technical projects and alternatives. Topics include time value of money and investments, cash flow
equivalence techniques, depreciation and income taxes, break-even analysis. Emphasis is placed on contemporary
computer-oriented decision-making tools and the application of cost information to the production of manufactured
goods. Use of computer is required. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
INT 311 Properties of Materials – 3 credit hours. A study of mechanical and physical properties of ferrous and nonferrous metals
and nonmetallic materials. Prediction of failure mechanisms, including corrosion, fatigue, and fracture. Students will
gain experience in the use of laboratory testing machines. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L.
INT 312 Internet Foundation – 3 credit hours. Internet and World Wide Web technologies. Development and maintenance of web
sites and web applications. Prerequisites: INT 206.
INT 316 Introduction to Computer Numerical Control – 3 credit hours. Computer programming and manual programming for
both NC mills and lathes. The transfer of part descriptions into a detailed process plan, tool selection and finally into NC
machine code. Verification accomplished through computer graphics and laboratory work. Prerequisites: INT 207.
INT 317 Industrial Robotics – 3 credit hours. A study of the principles, techniques, and applications of industrial robotics and
automated systems. Prerequisites: INT 316.
INT 320 Construction Systems Technologies – 3 credit hours. A study of the construction industry with regard to concepts of
construction technology through experiences in planning, organizing, and controlling of all available resources to
produce constructed products on and off-site. Students are expected to complete a construction project in the laboratory.
Prerequisites: Junior standing.
INT 326 Applied Statistics in Technology Management – 3 credit hours. Course introduces students to the applications of
statistics in technology management with emphasis on designing experiments, descriptive statistics, correlation and
regression, probability and sampling, and tests of significance. Use of Minitab statistical software is emphasized.
Prerequisites: INT 206.
INT 327 Statistical Quality Control – 3 credit hours. Methods and tools for analyzing and controlling variations in industrial
processes. Topics include frequency distributions, process data modeling, variables and attributes control charts, and
process capability. Use of Minitab statistical software is emphasized. Prerequisites: INT 326.
INT 328 Methods, Standards, and Measurement – 3 credit hours. This course covers the basic concepts and techniques of work
methods and measurement. The focus of this course is on workplace design, ergonomics of workplace design,
performance measurement, study of operations and process analysis, and methods analysis in manufacturing and service
industries. Prerequisites: INT 326.
INT 360 (MET/EET 360) Project Management – 3 credit hours. Theory and practice of managing projects including the
application of modern project management software to efficiently plan, schedule, and control project activities. Topics
include work breakdown structures, precedence grids, precedence node diagrams, analytical methods for network
solutions, resource scheduling, leveling and allocation, time-cost tradeoffs, and project-scheduling stimulation.
Prerequisites: INT 206.
INT 409 Plastics Processing – 3 credit hours. A basic course in plastics, structure, composition, and processing, extrusion,
injection, and blow molding. Prerequisites: INT 311.
INT 412 Technology, Society, and the Environment – 2 credit hours. This course examines the development of technology and its
effects upon the economy, environment, individual, and society. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
INT 415 Senior Project I – 1 credit hour. This course is designed for technology students in Electrical Engineering Technology,
Industrial Technology, and Mechanical Engineering Technology disciplines with a project environment to practice and
integrate what they learned throughout their respective programs. It is a culminating experience in the application of
technical, managerial, communications, leadership, team-building, and interpersonal skills to realistically solve a realworld technical problem in a team environment. Each interdisciplinary team will develop a project schedule and costs
required to complete the project in INT 416 (Senior Project II). Prerequisite: Senior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 285 ~
INT 416 Senior Project II – 2 credit hours. This course is designed for technology students in Electrical Engineering Technology,
Industrial Technology, and Mechanical Engineering Technology disciplines with a project environment to practice and
integrate what they learned throughout their respective programs. It is a culminating experience in the application of
technical, managerial, communications, leadership, team-building, and interpersonal skills to realistically solve a realworld technical problem in a team environment. Each interdisciplinary team will complete the project proposed in INT
415 (Senior Project I). A final report, including a project poster will be represented to the faculty and the Industrial
Advisor Board. Prerequisite: INT 415.
INT 417 Electronic Publishing I – 3 credit hours. This course is an official training course of Adobe Illustrator CS3. Students
learn to design, create, and manipulate text and other graphic elements on the computer screen. Exercises are generated
with the aid of the student knowledge of the program itself after completing computer lab activities and/or imported text
and graphic for print and online graphics. Prerequisites: INT 206, INT 217.
INT 418 Electronic Publishing II – 3 credit hours. This course is an official training course of Adobe Illustrator CS3. Students
learn how to plan, create and enhance an illustration, work with paths, layers, and tools, and edit artwork using advanced
features for print and for the web. Exercises are generated with the aid of the Project Illustrator itself along with other
programs in Adobe CS3. Prerequisites: INT 417.
INT 419 Quality in the Printing Industry – 3 credit hours. An analysis of industrial standards and methods of quality controls in
the printing industry. Prerequisites: INT 326.
INT 437 Facilities Planning – 3 credit hours. Techniques and procedures for developing an efficient facility layout. The course
focuses on systematic and methodical approach that will lead students through the collection, analysis and development
of information to produce a quality functional plant layout. Prerequisites: Senior Standing.
INT 441 Design of Experiments – 3 credit hours. This course covers destructive and non-destructive testing procedures and
equipment for determining mechanical, physical, and other properties of industrial materials. Students is required to use
various research tools and techniques to construct and analyze experiments for process improvements to include
Randomized blocks, Latin squares, and related designs, factorial design, regression models, response surface models, and
analysis of variance. Use of Minitab statistical software is emphasized. Prerequisites: INT 326.
INT 484 Computer-Integrated Manufacturing – 3 credit hours. A laboratory-based course designed to integrate the total
manufacturing system. Topics include flow line production, materials handling, group technology, and flexible and
computer integrated manufacturing. Prerequisites: INT 210.
INT 490 Internship I (Technical) – 3 credit hours. Practical technical experience in the work environment in which the student is
required to observe, shadow, interview, and participate in actual tasks performed in the occupation. Prior approval from
the internship coordinator is required one semester in advance of the semester of enrollment. Prerequisites: Junior
standing.
INT 491 Internship II (Management) – 3 credit hours. Practical management experience in the work environment in which the
student is required to observe, shadow, interview, and participate in actual tasks performed in the occupation. Prior
approval from the internship coordinator is required one semester in advance of the semester of enrollment.
Prerequisites: Junior standing.
Industrial Technology
IT 200 Occupational Safety and Health – 3 credit hours. An introductory study of the significance of maintaining quality
occupational safety and health standards in the workplace; safety education and promotion; and occupational safety and
health requirements. Prerequisites: None.
IT 333 Plant Layout and Material Handling – 3 credit hours. Techniques and procedures for developing an efficient facility
layout. The course focuses on systematic and methodical approach that will lead students through the collection, analysis
and development of information to produce a quality functional plant layout. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
IT 334 Production and Inventory Control – 3 credit hours. Principles and techniques of minimizing cost of ordering, receiving,
storing, issuing, scheduling, routing, dispatching, expediting, and controlling materials, parts, subassemblies, and final
assembles for a manufacturing system. Prerequisite: Junior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 286 ~
IT 341 Fire Protection and Prevention – 3 credit hours. An analysis of equipment, principles, standards and systems essential to
an effective fire protection and prevention program in industrial factories and plants. Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 342 Industrial Safety: Management and Technology – 3 credit hours. Based on sound safety management and quality and
performance technology principles, this course will help manage employees and/or projects in safety and health efforts.
Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 400 Quality Assurance – 3 credit hours. Tools and techniques to control quality of products and services and improve
enterprise performance by ensuring quality of processes, systems, organization, and leadership. Prerequisites: INT 326.
IT 404 Improving Manufacturing Systems – 3 credit hours. Methodology for improving efficiency, productivity and quality of
products and services in an organization. Includes strategic tools for eliminating or minimizing waste or non-value-added
activities and processes and product variations. Prerequisites: INT 326.
IT 405 Industrial Supervision – 3 credit hours. Modern industrial supervision techniques with respect to interpersonal relations,
societal changes, and effects of technological developments and impacts on duties, roles, and responsibilities of the
supervisor. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
IT 408 Manufacturing and Ergonomics – 3 credit hours. Survey of human factor engineering theory, research and applications
with particular reference to quality assurance and safety. Systems framework with specific emphasis on relationships
among systems components. Emphasis on operator constraints in the design of work processes, work stations, and
instrumentation. Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 410 Industrial Management – 3 credit hours. A survey course that focuses on the business environment, including
sociological and psychological principles pertinent to effective human relations in business and industry; work ethics,
values, and leadership skills; methods, concepts, and techniques appropriate to industrial organization and management;
and labor relations, regulations, and laws affecting employer-employee relations. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
IT 420 Industrial Hygiene – 3 credit hours. This course covers federal, state, and professional standards applicable to health and
environmental controls, and personal protection equipment in factories and plants. Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 422 Industrial Hazardous Materials Management – 3 credit hours. Specific OSH, NRS, ANSI and other standards as applied
to usage, storage, transportation and disposal of industrial hazardous materials. Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 425 Industrial Safety Standards I – 3 credit hours. Specific federal and state OSH standards as applied to building and
facilities, materials handling and storage, machine guarding, welding, electrical hazards, construction, and transportation
in factories and plants. Prerequisites: IT 200.
IT 426 Industrial Safety Standards II – 3 credit hours. Continuation of IT 425. Prerequisites: IT 425.
Logistics & Supply Chain Management
LSM 201 Introduction to Logistics and Supply Chain Management – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamentals of
logistics and supply chain management. It will include discussions of the effective and efficient integration of supply
chain management activities such as transportation, customer service, purchasing, inventory management, warehousing,
and supplier management. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing.
LSM 305 Purchasing and Supply Management – 3 credit hours. A detailed analysis of the interrelationships of military and
industrial supply with other major logistics functions of maintenance, procurement, transportation, and marketing.
Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 323 Transportation Management – 3 credit hours. An overview of transportation, emphasizing its role, environmental and
sociological aspects, economic characteristics, carrier services, regulations and policy goals. Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 324 Contract Law – 3 credit hours. A course on federal contracting, as well as commercial contracting which is essential
even to government employees engaged in contracting activities. This course is designed to provide knowledge and
application of the legal principles governing government contracts as they evolved from common law, statutes,
regulations, and court and board decisions. Application of law to each step of the federal procurement and federal 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 287 ~
assistance process, to include: formal advertising procurement by negotiation, inspection, acceptance, delivery,
warranties, modification of contracts, equitable adjustment, government furnished property, and disputes. Prerequisites:
None.
LSM 334 Maintenance Management/Engineering Design – 3 credit hours. A detailed analysis of the interrelationships of military
and industrial supply with other major logistics functions of maintenance, procurement, transportation, and marketing.
This course also covers all aspects of design of maintenance systems and concurrent engineering systems. Additionally,
it evaluates plans, programs, and budgets as they relate to maintenance, maintenance control systems and techniques, and
the relationship of maintenance to other logistics functions. Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 335 Configuration and Technology Management – 3 credit hours. A study of the process by which the complete and
functional characteristics of a manufactured item are identified. A detail analysis of the interrelationships of military and
industry supply with other major logistics functions of maintenance, procurement, transportation, and personnel.
Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 340 Advanced Logistics and Supply Chain Management – 3 credit hours. The challenges of effectively managing logistics
and supply chains, and the integration of information, product, and financial flows across supply chains. Topics covered
also include enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, supplier relationship management,
collaborative logistics and supply chain management, and reverse logistics. Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Logistics – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the form
of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related to the
student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development Services
(CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The student’s
faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to receive
ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
LSM 409 International Logistics and Supply Chain Management – 3 credit hours. Examines the management of logistics and
supply chain activities in the global arena. Topics include managing global sourcing and procurement, manufacturing,
warehousing, inventory management, and transportation. Export-import activities in a dynamic global environment will
be emphasized. Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 411 Procurement and Contract Management – 3 credit hours. An exploration of the primary aspects of the procurement and
management. It includes materials management, contract administration functions and responsibilities starting from
contract award to contract completion. It includes consideration of the role of small businesses and sub-contractors.
Prerequisites: LSM 305 or concurrent.
LSM 415 Logistics Support Analysis and Material Acquisition Life Cycle Cost Analysis RCM – 3 credit hours. Engineering
management as it applies to the development, direction, and control of the design, performance, and reliability of a
system. Concentration on life cycle cost modeling and logistics support analysis. Prerequisites: LSM 335.
LSM 422 Negotiation Techniques and Supply Chain Management – 3 credit hours. A course designed to discuss the principle and
techniques of effective negotiations in supply chain management, in order to build up partnerships and lasting
relationships with internal and external customers, suppliers, and other supply chain members. Topics covered will
include tactics and strategies for negotiations, contract types, and supplier relationships. Prerequisites: None.
LSM 426 Contract Cost and Price Analysis – 3 credit hours. A course to present the tools and techniques available to the student
for cost-price estimating, cost/price analysis, projection techniques, factors affecting profits or fees, the weighted
guidelines technique of profit analysis, and application of the learning curve theory. After cost/price analysis has been
performed, negotiation strategies and techniques are developed. Prerequisites: LSM 201.
LSM 427 Quality Management – 3 credit hours. An overview of the total quality management function, including organization,
management, process control, and product reliability and maintainability. Prerequisites: ECO 271, MGT 315.
LSM 428 Strategic Logistics and Supply Chain Management – 3 credit hours. A capstone course integrating diverse areas of
logistics and supply chain management, including transportation, customer service, supply chain risks management,
inventory management, life cycle management and other supply chain management activities. Prerequisites: LSM 305,
LSM 323, LSM 340.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 288 ~
LSM 435 Supply Chain Risk Management – 3 credit hours. This course examines sources of supply chain risk, the potential impact
of supply disruptions, and business continuity/contingency planning. Mitigating supply chain risks by identifying,
analyzing, controlling, and managing risk sources along the chain. Prerequisites: LSM 305.
LSM 451 Inventory Management and Production Control – 3 credit hours. A study of the management techniques associated with
material management as an element of integrated logistics support in the system/ product life cycle management concept.
Management of assets from acquisitions through final disposition is considered from cost effectiveness and customer
satisfaction viewpoints. Prerequisites: LSM 305.
Mechanical Drafting Technology
MDT 111L Technical Drafting – 3 credit hours. An introductory study of technical drawing theory and practice, including lettering,
use of drafting instruments, orthographic projection, sections, auxiliary views, pictorial sketching, and dimensioning. An
introduction to computer-aided-drafting (CAD) is included. Prerequisites: None
MDT 112L Machine and Tool Drafting – 3 credit hours A continuation of MDT 111L. Includes shop processes, theory and practice
of dimensioning and tolerances, an introduction to detail and working drawings, pictorial drawing, reproduction of
drawings, machine shop blueprint reading, and a continuation of CAD. Prerequisites: MDT 111L.
MDT 204L Electrical/Electronics Drafting – 3 credit hours. A study of specialized electronic drafting theory, practice of dimensions
and tolerances. Detail and working drawings, pictorial drawing, and reproduction of drawings are covered. Prerequisites:
MDT 111L.
MDT 206 Architectural Drafting – 3 credit hours. An overall study of architectural working drawings including blueprint reading,
representation of buildings, and construction detailing. Perspective drawing, shades and shadowing, and rendering are
included. Prerequisites: MDT 111L.
MDT 210 Piping and Sheet Metal Drafting – 3 credit hours. A course on designing and drafting pipe systems. It includes symbols,
methods of representing pipe and pipe fittings, specification of parts and language of piping, layout, and drafting of sheet
metal ducts. All work is done using CAD. Prerequisites: MDT 111L.
MDT 213 Computer Graphics – 3 credit hours. A first course in the use of AutoCADTM software. Students are taught methods of
computer graphical representation in two dimensions. Prerequisites: MDT 111L.
MDT 252 AutoCADTM for Apparel – 3 credit hours (2 two-hour lecture/lab periods per week). An introductory study of
AutoCADTM for apparel design and the basic principles of computer-assisted drafting. Offers the students hands-on
practical training for drafting applications. Not for Engineering Technology majors. Prerequisites: none.
MDT 302L Technical Design Principles – 3 credit hours. A study of power drives including gear, chain, and V-belt drives; shafts;
keys, splines, and snap rings; springs; power screws; rolling and journal bearings; and brakes, clutches, flywheels, and
couplings. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: Junior standing.
MDT 306 Structural Drafting – 3 credit hours. A study of the drafting and design of structural systems in steel, wood, and concrete
with emphasis on the composition characteristics of the material. Prerequisites: CMG 218 and MDT 111L.
MDT 313 Computer-Aided Drafting and Design I – 3 credit hours. A course offering hands-on training in two- and threedimensional computer-aided design software. Prerequisites: MDT 213.
MDT 407 Mechanical Design I – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MDT 302L. The emphasis is on a design project using the
principles covered in MDT 302L. Prerequisites: MDT 302L.
MDT 414 Computer-Aided Drafting and Design II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MDT 313. Creation of a full-scale threedimensional computer model design; various checks, such as corridor clearance, and horizontal and vertical layout
schemes that can be carried out using a model; and error-reduction design methods, not possible with two-dimensional
modeling techniques. Prerequisites: MDT 313.
Mechanical Engineering
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 289 ~
ME 101 Introduction to Mechanical Engineering – 1 credit hour (1 clock hour lecture period per week). Brief review of
mechanical engineering as a practice is reviewed briefly. Students are required to develop a basic engineering project to
include: Market outlook, basic production techniques, economic assessment, planning and design, manufacturing,
testing, and product evaluation. A final technical report is required. The report includes an oral presentation and
documentation in writing. Emphasis is placed on team development, consistent use of engineering units, and computer
usage. Project selection is under the approval of the instructor. Corequisites: ME 101L.
ME 101L Introduction. to Mechanical Engineering Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory required to
develop the project/s associated with ME 101. Corequisites: ME 101.
ME 103 Computer-Aided Design I – 2 credit hours (2 clock hour lecture and 1 clock hour lab period per week). A two hour
lecture and a one hour lab class. Introduction to computer graphics user interface (GUI) for Computer-Aided Design
(CAD), Graphics visualization and interpretation; creating engineering drawings in two and three dimensions, solid
modeling utilities, assembly for manufacturing fundamentals, manufacturing process definition and implementation.
Topics include basics on solid modeling, sweeps and blends, Interaction with automated manufacturing devices and
basics of Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAD). Prerequisites: none. Corequisites: None.
ME 104 Engineering Programming I – 3 credit hours. Introduction to problem solving techniques in engineering using digital
computers and Fortran programming. Topics include flow charting and emphasis on analysis and solutions of science
problems in fluid dynamics, materials, structures and energy systems. Fundamentals of linear algebra are discussed.
Prerequisites: None.
ME 204 Engineering Analysis – 3 credit hours. The goal of the course is to impart the concepts and techniques of modern linear
algebra including, but not limited to, systems of linear equations and matrices, Gaussian elimination, Gauss-Jordan
elimination, homogenous systems, matrix algebra, elementary matrices, inverses, determinants. Introduction to statistics
and data analysis, probability and sampling distributions, error analysis, estimation and statistical intervals, the analysis
of variance, experimental data, and linear regression. Prerequisites: MTH 126.
ME 205 Statics – 3 credit hours. Principles of equilibrium, governing equations, free-body diagrams. Topics include statics and
the design problem, vectorial representation of forces, analysis of mechanical systems in equilibrium, properties of
forces, equivalent systems, moments, couples, and resultants. Applied problems in friction, centroids and area moments
of inertia and an introduction to computer simulation techniques. Prerequisites: MTH 126. Corequisites: PHY 214.
ME 206 Dynamics – 3 credit hours. Principles of systems in motion, fundamental governing equations for particles and rigid
bodies, dynamics and the design problem, vectorial representation of velocity and acceleration, relative motion, work,
energy, impulse, and momentum, along with an introduction to computer simulation techniques. Prerequisites: ME 205.
ME 210 Material Science – 3 credit hours. Structure of matter. Physical and mechanical properties of materials including metals,
polymers, ceramics, composites, and electronic materials. Equilibrium diagrams and heat treatments, material selection
for manufacturing and corrosion problems are also included. Prerequisites: CHE 101, PHY 213.
ME 231 Strength of Materials – 3 credit hours. A study of the mechanics of deformable materials, durability, chalk propagation,
performance, and life-cycle analysis; theory of stress and strain; deformations under simplified loads (axial, torsional,
bending); analysis of columns, buckling loads; review of data acquisition and instrumentation for testing; material
selection for design. Prerequisites: ME 205, ME 210.
ME 300 Mathematical Methods in Mechanical Engineering – 3 credit hours. A study of solution methods for nonlinear algebraic
equations, sets of linear algebraic equations, eigenvalue problems, interpolation and curve fitting, numerical integration,
numerical differentiation, and or commonly, and polynomial equations. Applications in fluid mechanics, heat and mass
transfer, thermodynamics, kinematics, and design are covered. Prerequisites: MTH 227 and ME 104.
ME 301 Analysis and Instrumentation of Physical Systems – 2 credit hours. A two hour lecture class. A unified introduction to
dynamic engineering systems, including those with electrical, mechanical, and fluid elements. Mathematical modeling
techniques subdivided in topics and used to gain insight in engineering systems and analytical as well as experimental
techniques of general importance in engineering problems are presented. Basic concepts and the use of modern
instrumentation, including digital systems, are covered in the lab. Prerequisites: EE 201, ME 205 and MTH 227.
Corequisites: ME 301L.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 290 ~
ME 301L Analysis and Instrumentation of Physical Systems Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory supporting the required practices for
ME 301. Corequisites: ME 301.
ME 307 (EE 307) Fundamentals of Nuclear Engineering – 3 credit hours. Introduction to topics and issues in nuclear engineering,
with scientific and technical topics interspersed with discussions about policy, lifelong learning and professional
responsibility/ethics. Fundamentals of radiation, nuclear chemistry, and physics that are needed to understand concepts
of nuclear reactions, including fission and fusion. Introduction to the concepts of nuclear reactor theory and analysis
needed to understand nuclear power engineering. Technical and policy aspects associated with nuclear (non)
proliferation and the nuclear fuel cycle, most specifically involving the management of spent nuclear fuel. Introduction
to the interactions of nuclear radiation with matter in terms of understanding concepts of radiation protection, radiation
detection, and health physics. Prerequisites: PHY 214, MTH 227.
ME 310 Thermodynamics – 3 credit hours. A study of basic thermodynamic properties; pressure, temperature, work, specific
volume, and energy. The first and second laws of thermodynamics, closed and open systems, enthalpy, and entropy;
properties of gas mixtures and air-vapor mixtures; as well as basic applications are covered. Prerequisites: PHY 213.
ME 311 Power Systems Integration – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the elements and the processes of power systems and their
integration. Topics covered are: energy utilization, combustion, energy cycles, steam power plants, fuel beds and
suspension firing, heat exchangers, pumps, pipes, water supply and conditioning, power system performance, variable
loads, station performance and energy cost. Prerequisites: ME 310, ME 360.
ME 312 Heat and Mass Transfer – 3 credit hours (2 clock hour lecture period per week). Fundamentals of heat transfer by
conduction, convection, and radiation, and mass transfer by convection. Relevance to engineering applications is also
addressed. Prerequisites: ME 310, 360. Corequisites: ME 312L.
ME 312L Heat and Mass Transfer Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory to support the practices and
projects of ME 312. Corequisites: ME 312.
ME 313L Experimental Mechanics Lab – 1 credit hour. Introduction to experimental stress analysis; measurement of tensile,
compressive, bending and shear stresses; impact and hardness tests; vibration measurements, modal analysis; structural
dynamics; Strain Gages. Prerequisites: ME 231.
ME 320 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines – 3 credit hours. Kinematics and dynamics of machine elements, vector loop
approach, numerical methods and graphical techniques, kinematics coefficients, newton formulation, power equation,
gears and cams, static and dynamic balancing, critical speeds of shafts. Prerequisites: ME 206.
ME 360 Fluid Mechanics I – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of fluid mechanics, covered are Newtonian fluids, review of systems
of units, the perfect gas equation, incompressible flow, Bernoulli’s equation, channel flow, boundary layers, subsonic
flow, flow through converging-diverging passages, compressible flow, potential theory, flow through turbo machinery,
and relevance to engineering applications. Prerequisites: ME 206, MTH 227. Corequisites: ME 360L.
ME 360L Fluid Mechanics I Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Supports projects/practices of ME 360.
Corequisites: ME 360.
ME 380 Computer-Aided Design II – 3 credit hours. Introduction to the fundamentals of structural finite element modeling.
Geometry creation, element types, material specification, problem solution and results post-processing. A focus is placed
on modeling techniques and guidelines using a commercially available software (ANSYS/HyperWorks). Applications to
problems including structural mechanics, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, dynamics, stress concentrations, fatigue life, and
thermal stressed. Projects in creative mechanical design and optimization. Prerequisites: ME 231.
ME 390 Directed Study – 1-3 credit hours. This course covers topics of the mechanical engineering junior level curricula that
incorporate independent research and independent study. It can be taken as individual work within campus facilities and
it may include work at off-campus research laboratories. The work requires the supervision and approval of instructor.
Course credit/s can be used for substitution of appropriate 300-level junior class or laboratory in the ME program.
Prerequisites: Junior standing and instructor consent.
ME 412 (ME 512) Analysis and Synthesis of Gas Turbines and Components – 3 credit hours. A review of aerothermodynamics
of propulsion systems, characterization of power plant utilization, and operation cycle analysis. On-off design 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 291 ~
performance, component characterization, component design, component matching, optimization, and introduction to
power plant integration systems in a fixed or moving architecture are also covered. Prerequisites: ME 310. Corequisites:
ME 412L.
ME 412L Analysis and Synthesis of Gas Turbines and Components Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week).
Laboratory supporting projects/practices of ME 412. Corequisites: ME 412.
ME 413 Rocket Propulsion – 3 credit hours. A study of propulsion system requirements for terrestrial and interplanetary flight.
Basic principles and performance of both solid and liquid chemical rocket propulsion systems, elements of nuclear
rockets, nuclear-electrical power systems, and electrical propulsion systems are addressed. Prerequisites: ME 310.
ME 414 Gas Turbine Engine Design and Manufacture – 3 credit hours. A study of synthesis of gas turbine design under the
constraints of power plant system integration or airframe integration. Definitions of system requirements, preliminary
configuration analysis and engine sizing; inlet preliminary design; compressor, combustor, turbine and nozzle design; cogeneration and heat recovery considered for stationary power plants.; engine on and off design performance simulation;
installed thrust and system interference effects; noise sources and noise control are covered. Prerequisites: ME 310, ME
360.
ME 415 Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration – 3 credit hours. A study of refrigeration cycles, psychrometrics,
thermal comfort, ventilation, duct design, equipment sizing, energy recovery, and solar design concepts. Prerequisites:
ME 310, ME 312.
ME 416 (ME 516) Gas Dynamics – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamental theory of one-dimensional gas dynamics:
Isentropic flow, flow in converging-diverging nozzles, shock propagation, normal and oblique shock theory, PrandtlMeyer expansions, Fanno line flow, and measurement methods. Prerequisites: ME 310, ME 360.
ME 417 Power Systems Integration and Performance – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamentals of aerothermodynamics of
propulsion systems. Analysis of the elements and the processes of power systems and their integration. Ideal Brayton air
cycle, and real turbojet and turbofan performance. Topics include: energy utilization, combustion, energy cycles, steam
power plants, heat exchangers, compressors, economy parameters, performance simulation, and prediction. Introduction
to power plant/airframe integration will be discussed. Prerequisites: ME 310, ME 360.
ME 425 Design of Machine Elements – 3 credit hours. Application of engineering mechanics and strength of materials to the
analysis. Synthesis, and design of machine elements (design of screws, fasteners, and connections; design of welded,
brazed, and bonded joints; mechanical springs; bearings; gears; shafts; design of clutches, brakes, couplings, and
flywheels); theories of failure, stress concentrations, fatigue life, and thermal stresses; consideration of economics and
safety; projects in creative mechanical design; design case studies. Prerequisites: ME 231.
ME 432 Design for Manufacture and Reliability – 3 credit hours. A study of the design synthesis and methods; strength design of
mechanical structures and components; optimization and reliability principles; and computer-aided design techniques.
Emphasis is on modeling synergistic processes for manufacture. Prerequisites: ME 103. Corequisites: ME 432L.
ME 432L Design for Manufacture and Reliability – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory supporting design
work for ME 432. Corequisites: ME 432.
ME 441 Renewable Energy – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamentals of renewable energy technologies and their
applications. Emphasis will be placed on energy sources such as active and passive solar energy, photovoltaic systems,
hydropower, wind energy, biomass, geothermal energy, and ocean energy. Technological readiness, efficiency and
sustainability of renewable energy alternatives will be discussed. Prerequisites: ME 310 or instructor consent.
ME 442 Solar Thermal Engineering – 3 credit hours.
ME 451 Automatic Control Systems – 3 credit hours. Amplification of knowledge of linear system properties gained from
previous courses to accomplish modeling, identification, and feedback control of dynamic systems. Both classical and
state feedback control concepts are developed in this course. Digital control theory and analysis are also applied to
systems composed of linear elements. Laboratory experiments are hardware applications that verify these concepts using
both analog and digital computers as appropriate. Prerequisites: MTH 238.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 292 ~
ME 460 (EE 460) Nuclear Reactor Engineering I – 3 credit hours. Heat generation and removal from reactors; steady- and
unsteady-state conduction mechanisms in the reactor elements; single and two-phases, and liquid metal cooling, core
thermal design. Prerequisites: ME 307 or EE 307.
ME 461 (EE 461) Nuclear Reactor Engineering II – 3 credit hours. Heat generation and removal studies from reactors; reactorspecific issues; heat transfer calculations; heat flux calculations and core thermal design; major safety issues.
Prerequisites: ME 460 or EE 460.
ME 470 Mechanical Engineering Design Project – 2 credit hours. A one hour lecture class and a one hour lab class. Design or
comprehensive analysis and development of an engineering product or process. The student is required to give an oral
presentation of his work and submit an approved typewritten technical report. Prerequisites: Senior standing and ME
425.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Mechanical Engineering program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
ME 471 (ME 571) Systems Engineering – 3 credit hours. The systems engineering process is defined and investigated in this
course. Among the topics introduced and studied are conceptual, preliminary, and detail design concepts using modern
tools such as CAD, optimization, and systems test and evaluation in completing designs built for increased reliability,
maintainability, and supportability. Environmental and social impact and life-cycle costs are also introduced.
Prerequisites: ME 300.
ME 472 (ME 572) Economic Evaluation of Design – 3 credit hours. The concepts of life-cycle costs and optimization of
alternatives are investigated. The formal study of decision-making and economic theory are applied to engineering
projects. Case studies are used. Prerequisites: ECO 231 or ECO 232, ME 231.
ME 473 Logistics – 3 credit hours. A study of the initial distribution and the subsequent sustaining life-cycle maintenance and
support of a system of products throughout the consumer use phase. Systems design will be re-evaluated with emphasis
placed on maintenance and support, taking into consideration reliability, maintainability, human factors, and life cycle
cost factors. Prerequisites: ME 300.
ME 475 Mechanical Engineering Design Project Continuation – 2 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab period
per week). A continuation of ME 470. Prerequisites: ME 470.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Mechanical Engineering program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
ME 481 (ME 581) Quality and Reliability Assurance – 3 credit hours. An introduction to probability and statistics. Quantitative
techniques for establishing product specifications and process controls for quality assurance, ISO 9000; the role of
reliability in manufacturing operations; and so forth, are covered. Prerequisites: MTH 227 and senior standing.
ME 482 (ME 582) Operations Planning and Scheduling – 3 credit hours. Analysis and design of production and control systems
for both intermittent and continuous manufacturing, inventory effects on production, and production control techniques
review of Just In Time manufacturing. Emphasis is given to extending concurrent engineering techniques and methods
for manufacturing and product development. Prerequisites: MTH 227 and senior standing
ME 485 Computer Aided Manufacturing – 2 credit hours. A study of the use of CAD/CAM/CIM technology and the
minimization of the overall manufacturing operation, including product design, product modification, areas, and
economy. Prerequisites: ME 432. Corequisites: ME 485L.
ME 485L Computer Aided Manufacturing Lab – 1 credit hour (3 clock hour lab period per week). Laboratory supporting projects
and practices of ME 485. Corequisites: ME 485.
ME 490 Special Topics – 1-3 credit hours. A course covering, in additional depth, topics on Mechanical Engineering. It can be
taken as individual work under the supervision of instructor. This course can be taken multiple times with students
receiving additional credit each time. The specifics of each course will be identified at the beginning of each semester.
Prerequisites: Senior standing and instructor consent.
Mechanical Engineering Technology
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 293 ~
MET 103 Introduction to Engineering Technology – 3 credit hours. A course providing a broad view of the many specialties in
engineering and technology and discussing the differences between engineering science and engineering technology.
This course acquaints the beginning student with the fundamental mathematical & physical concepts, tools, equipment,
and language of the electrical and mechanical fields. Scheduling, planning, and time management skills are developed.
MET 200 Electromechanical Principles – 3 credit hours. A survey of the principles of DC circuits, AC circuits, and electronics
These principles will then be applied to the design of electromechanical devices such as motors, transducers, solenoids,
and controls. This course is designed for non-EET majors who need a knowledge of electromechanical devices and
measuring instruments. Prerequisite: MTH 113.
MET 304 Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulics – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamentals of fluid mechanics including fluid
properties, fluid statics and dynamics, continuity and energy principles. Fluid flow in piping systems is covered, as well
as open channel flow, pneumatics, and hydraulics. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
MET 306 Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer – 3 credit hours. A study of the basic laws of thermodynamics, the thermodynamic
properties of fluids, and the flow of heat energy by conduction, convection, and radiation. Applications include power
plants, internal combustion engines, compressors, turbines, Refrigeration, and heat exchangers. Use of the computer is
required. Prerequisites: MET 304.
MET 312 Methods of Engineering Analysis – 3 credit hours. The application of algebra, trigonometry and calculus to engineering
problems. Microsoft ExcelTM is used for curve fitting, solving single and simultaneous algebraic. A special emphasis is
placed on differential equations, probability, and statistics. Prerequisites: MTH 113.
MET 315 Mechatronics – 3 credit hours. Integration of electrical, mechanical, and computer technology in the design,
manufacture, and maintenance of a wide range of engineering products and processes. It gives a framework of
knowledge that allows engineers to develop an interdisciplinary understanding and integrated approach to engineering.
Prerequisites: MDT 302L or EET 310L.
MET 330L Mechanical Engineering Technology Lab I – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in statics, fluid mechanics, and
hydraulics. Lab preparation sessions will review theory before each project. Computer generated reports will be turned in
by each student for each project and some oral presentations will be required. A specific lab report format will be
adhered to. Prerequisites: TBC 102.
MET 331L Mechanical Engineering Technology Lab II – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in thermodynamics, heat transfer, and
electro-mechanics. Lab preparation sessions will review theory before each project. Computer generated reports will be
turned in by each student for each project and some oral presentations will be required. A specific lab report format will
be adhered to. Prerequisites: MET 330L.
MET 360 (INT/EET 360) Project Management – 3 credit hours. Theory and practice of managing projects including the
application of modern project management software to efficiently plan, schedule, and control project activities. Topics
include work breakdown structures, precedence grids, precedence node diagrams, analytical methods for network
solutions, resource scheduling, leveling and allocation, time-cost tradeoffs, and project-scheduling stimulation.
Prerequisites: INT 206.
MET 405 Hydraulic Power – 3 credit hours. A course in the design and analysis of hydraulic power systems. Topics include:
hydraulic system analysis using the energy equation; design configurations for controlling flow and pressure; operating
characteristics of pumps, valves, heat exchangers, accumulators, and accessories; design and analysis of hydraulic
systems for some typical applications. Prerequisites: MET 304, MET 306.
MET 407 Fundamentals of Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning – 3 credit hours. Study of the basic principles of
commercial and residential air conditioning and heating systems. The calculation of heating and cooling loads and the
use of the psychometric chart are covered. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: MET 306.
MET 408 Thermal Design – 3 credit hours. A review and advanced study of the principles of heat transfer. Practical systems
involving thermal energy utilization and transfer will be designed. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: MET
306.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 294 ~
MET 409 Mechanical Vibration – 3 credit hours. A study of the response of structures to vibrational motion, including free and
forced motion, and damped and undamped systems. Concepts of natural mode, natural frequency, and resonance
phenomena are covered. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: CMG 218.
MET 410 Propulsion Technology – 3 credit hours. Study of power generation through the internal combustion process. Included in
the study are engines, the turbine, and the rocket engine concept. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: MET
306.
MET 412 Control Systems – 3 credit hours. A combined study of controlling methods and equipment for power transfer devices.
Prerequisites: MET 312, MET 126.
MET 413 Quality Control and Reliability – 3 credit hours. Fundamental working concepts and methods of measuring, evaluating
and interpreting industrial data to insure product quality, emphasizing compatibility analysis and statistical control
charts. Reliability theory is also covered. Prerequisites: Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: Senior standing or
instructor consent.
MET 414 Operations Planning and Scheduling – 3 credit hours. Production and control systems for both intermittent and
continuous manufacturing are studied. Inventory control is treated as an integral part of the production control system
using MRP and JIT techniques. Emphasis is placed on the role of concurrent engineering situations in these
manufacturing situations. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
MET 415 Design of Manufacturing Facilities – 3 credit hours. Methods for developing optimal plant layout and materials handling
systems are studied. Emphasis is placed on the interrelationship of materials handling systems and equipment location
for smooth product flow. A term project provides experience in an actual manufacturing facilities design. Use of the
computer is required. Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
MET 416 Operations Research – 3 credit hours. Quantitative techniques used in the solution of manufacturing operations problems
are studied. Topics include planning and control methods (CPM and PERT), linear programming, queuing theory, and
simulation. Use of the computer is required. Prerequisites: Senior standing or instructor consent.
MET 421 Numerical Control of Machines – 3 credit hours. An introduction to numerical control as applied to drilling, milling, and
turning operations. Mathematical methods for computer numerical control are presented. Includes cutter center line
programming, tool offsets, cutter diameter compensation TNR compensation, and tool length compensation. Experience
is provided in operation of an automated manufacturing machine. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
MET 428 MET Capstone Phase I – 1 credit hour. Development of proficiency in analysis, layout, and completion of a mechanical
project. This first course is provided to facilitate project selection, project planning/scheduling, literature survey, patent
searching, and proposal writing. Prerequisites: MET 315.
MET 429 MET Capstone Phase II – 1 credit hour. A continuation of MET 428, focusing on the completion of the project and
presentation of the final results. The course is conducted to simulate the procedures utilized by local industries to
conduct engineering projects. An objective of the course is to demonstrate and practice the diverse skills and teamwork
required in the modern workplace. Prerequisites: MET 428.
MET 430L Mechanical Engineering Technology Lab III – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in manufacturing processes, strength of
materials, and properties of materials. Lab preparation sessions will review theory before each project. Computer
generated reports will be turned in by each student for each project and some oral presentations will be required. A
specific lab report format will be adhered to. Prerequisites: CMG 218.
MET 431L Mechanical Engineering Technology Lab IV – 1 credit hour. Laboratory projects in quality control and machine design.
Lab preparation sessions will review theory before each project. Computer generated reports will be turned in by each
student for each project and some oral presentations will be required. A specific lab report format will be adhered to.
Prerequisites: MET 330.
MET 490 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering Technology – 1-4 credit hours. Topics based on modern trends in mechanical
engineering technology. This course can be taken multiple times (in different topics) with students receiving additional
credit each time. The specifics of each course will be identified at the beginning of each semester. Prerequisites: Junior
or senior standing.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 295 ~
Management
MGT 207 Legal Environment and Ethics – 3 credit hours. A study of the legal environment as it pertains to profit and/or nonprofit
organizations, along with ethical considerations, including social and political influence, as they affect such organization.
Prerequisites: None.
MGT 250 Managerial Communication – 3 credit hours. This class provides an interdisciplinary study and practice of the
fundamental communication principles for memoranda, letter, and report writing. Emphasis is placed on clear, accurate,
and concise writing in a variety of professional settings. The course also addresses the fundamentals of communication
such as the communication process, interpersonal communication, intercultural communication, conflict management,
nonverbal communication, listening, managing meetings, workplace interactions, and more. Prerequisites: ENG 101,
ENG 102.
MGT 315 Principles of Management – 3 credit hours. A study of the functions of management, which includes planning,
organizing, leading and controlling, and the application of management principles in organizations. Prerequisites: None.
MGT 318 Business Law – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to cover the following subject matter: professional ethics and
legal responsibility of accountants; debtor-creditor relations; government regulation of business; (UCC) uniform
commercial code; business organizations, contracts and property. Prerequisites: MGT 207.
MGT 320 Planning and Launching New Ventures – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on business plan development, especially
the financial aspects of the plan. The intent is that students will use a feasibility analysis, such as the one completed in
ETR 3910, and turn that into a complete business plan. Additionally, students will learn about seed capital, venture, and
other means of financing new ventures. Prerequisites: None. Recommended background for this course consists of: MGT
330 and MKT 410.
MGT 330 Introduction to Entrepreneurship – 3 credit hours. An introductory course intended to provide students with a solid
foundation in terms of the vital role played by entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship in the 21st century global economy.
Emphasis is on entrepreneurship as a manageable process that can be applied in virtually any organizational setting. It is
also a course that integrates a number of different disciplines, ranging from sociology and physiology to economics,
finance, marketing, and human recourse management. Further, it is a course that mixes theory with practice, and you will
be challenged to apply principles, concepts and framework to real world situations. Prerequisites: None.
MGT 332 Organizational Behavior and Theory – 3 credit hours. A study of the behavior of individuals and groups within
organizations. The course also examines organizational design and processes. Prerequisites: MGT 315.
MGT 352 Entrepreneurship – 3 credit hours. An overview of entrepreneurship, primarily focusing on the creation and management
of small businesses. Several critical functions necessary for their operations such as planning, organizing, directing,
controlling, purchasing, production, marketing, and finance are examined. Prerequisites: MGT 315, FIN 315, MKT 315.
MGT 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Management – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the
form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related
to the student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development
Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The
student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to
receive ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
MGT 397 Management Science – 3 credit hours. This course introduces the students to quantitative techniques in management
sciences that are applicable to business. Topics include: Decision Analysis, Linear Programming, Transportation &
Assignment Models, Network Models, Integer Programming, Goal Programming, and Project Management.
Prerequisites: ECO 271, MTH 120.
MGT 402 Independent Study – 1-3 credit hours. A research project accomplished under the supervision of a member of the College
of Business and Public Affairs faculty. Such projects will involve the detailed study of a topic of particular interest to the
business profession, and the results of the study will be documented by a research report. Prerequisites: Senior standing
and instructor consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 296 ~
MGT 412 Principles of Insurance – 3 credit hours. A survey of basic principles, problems and terminology associated with
individual, group and organizational risk management as it relates to the following: the legal aspects of insurance, the
risk management process, types of coverage, the insurance market, operating an insurance business and governmental
regulation of the profession. Prerequisites: MGT 315.
MGT 413 Production/Operations Management – 3 credit hours. An examination of the tools and theory of production/operations
management. Focus is on the issues related to the planning, controlling and designing of production/operations systems.
Prerequisites: MTH 120 and ECO 271.
MGT 427 Quality Management – 3 credit hours. An overview of the total quality management function; including organization,
management, process control, and product reliability and maintainability. Prerequisites: ECO 271, MGT 315.
MGT 430 Advanced Management Seminar – 3 credit hours. An in-depth exploration of current issues and special topics in
management. Contents will vary depending on the current status of management practices and methods, and the needs of
the students. Prerequisites: MGT 315 and instructor consent.
MGT 431 Growing and Managing New Ventures – 3 credit hours. One of the most troublesome aspects of entrepreneurship is
running the business once it is started. This course focuses on techniques to grow the new venture and how to manage
both the growth and operations. Considerable emphasis will be placed on expanding existing markets, finding new
markets, anticipating the next generation of products, and managing cash flow. This course is the capstone course for
both the Entrepreneurship Minor and the Management Minor. Prerequisites: None. Recommended background for this
course consists of: MGT 320.
MGT 433 Human Resource Management – 3 credit hours. An examination of the activities and practices related to effective and
efficient utilization of human resources in organizations. Prerequisites: MGT 315.
MGT 440 Field Studies in Entrepreneurial Firms – 3 credit hours. This course involves supervised study of an organization in one
of two forms. Students may work in student groups to establish a relationship, identify a strategic problem or question,
design and execute a study, and report implementable recommendations to a regional firm or work in a supervised
internship in an entrepreneurial business. Prerequisites: None.
MGT 442 Strategic Management and Policy – 3 credit hours. A study in developing an understanding of policy formation and
decision-making as related to the current business environment. The course objectives are attained through integrating
business fundamentals (marketing, production, finance, economics, statistics, etc.) into methods of resolving business
problems. The instructional methods including lectures, discussions, and case analysis. Prerequisites: ACC 204, ACC
472 (ACC majors only), FIN 315, MGT 315, MIS 315, MKT 315.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Accounting, Business Administration, Entrepreneurship, Finance,
Logistics & Supply Chain Management, Management, and Marketing programs. Therefore, students majoring in these
programs cannot substitute this course.
MGT 445 Senior Portfolio: Writing the Business Plan – 3 credit hours. Students will study the basic components and varied
audiences for the business plan. Each student will write a business plan and will be required to present the plan to a panel
of business leaders. Prerequisites: None. Recommended background for this course consists of: MGT 330, MKT 410.
MGT 450 Principles of Real Estate – 3 credit hours. A study of the economic and legal environment within which real estate is
transferred and used. Includes the real estate market; contracts; property ownership; financing; brokerage, valuation and
government operations. Prerequisites: None.
MGT 458 International Business – 3 credit hours. This course examines the organizational, administrative, marketing, and financial
aspects of business-based operations; political, and the legal and economic factors influencing international business,
including community relations, business climate, and human resource management issues. Prerequisites: MGT 315 or
MGT 332.
MGT 465 International Management – 3 credit hours. This course examines the international dimensions of management. Includes
internationalization of the firm, globalization of industry, international strategy frameworks, strategy implementation
requirements, management of relationships with host nations, cross-cultural management and international human
resource management. Prerequisites: MGT 315.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 297 ~
MGT 473 Small Business Counseling – 3 credit hours. A practical exposure to the problems and opportunities of small business
firms. Student teams are assigned as a counseling unit to assist local business managers in the identification of problems
and the formulation of alternative solutions, as well as the identification of areas of opportunity within the participating
organizations. Prerequisites: MGT 352, senior standing, instructor consent.
Management Information Systems
MIS 213 Computer Applications in Business – 3 credit hours. A practical application of user-friendly software packages in
processing personal and business documents using microcomputers. Using application programs in word processing,
electronic spreadsheet, database management, personal information management, presentation graphics and multimedia.
Students will create, manipulate and hyperlink documents. This course also explores basic computer concepts and
techniques. Prerequisites: None.
MIS 315 Principles of Management Information Systems – 3 credit hours. A language-independent, introductory course on
management information systems. It involves design and development of business systems. Students are exposed to an
overview of a process, or a structured approach to the definition of needs, creation of specification, and implementation
of new systems. This process overview encompasses an historic summary of the traditional life cycle methodology used
for system development. Prerequisites: MIS 213 or instructor consent.
MIS 331 Information Systems and Analysis and Design – 3 credit hours. Techniques and philosophies of systems analysis are
addressed. Included are: traditional versus structured design methods, computer-based tools for systems analysis,
workbenches, design and analysis of database systems, maintenance of existing information systems, human/machine
interfaces, and security and control. System design, implementation, and methods of systems installation and operation
are presented. A system development project is required. Prerequisites: MIS 315.
MIS 345 Database Management Systems – 3 credit hours. This course provides an introduction to the design and use of databases
in meeting business information needs. Topics include database planning conceptual design, and data administration.
The concepts are studies with projects involving the use of a current database management system. Prerequisites: MIS
315.
MIS 356 Data Communications and Networking – 3 credit hours. The technical and managerial aspects of telecommunications as
they apply to the business environment are discussed. Issues include: communications components and services, local
area network architecture, managerial implementations, organizations issues and cost/benefits analysis. Prerequisites:
MIS 213.
MIS 385 Electronic Commerce – 3 credit hours. This course provides complete coverage of the key business and technology
elements of electronic commerce. It introduces readers to both the theory and practice of conducting business over the
Internet and World Wide Web. Prerequisites: MIS 315.
MIS 410 Seminar in Management Information Systems – 3 credit hours. An in-depth coverage of a variety of contemporary issues
in management information systems. Prerequisites: MIS 315, instructor consent.
MIS 478 Network Security – 3 credit hours. This course introduces the basic concepts of network security. It addresses security
issues and practical applications related to network and web risk threats and countermeasures, system access points,
hardware and software defense methods and organizational security policies. It also examines the problems and concerns
related to computer abuse, fraud and investigation. The course makes use of lecture and discussion, cases, research and
team projects. Prerequisites: MIS 315, MIS 356.
MIS 479 Introduction to Object Oriented Programming – 3 credit hours. This course provides a study of the C++ programming
language as they pertain to managerial applications. In addition, the course will introduce the use of object-oriented
programming methodologies. Prerequisites: MIS 315.
MIS 489 Systems Development Project – 3 credit hours. This course provides the student with an opportunity to apply the
knowledge and skills acquired in other MIS courses towards the development of effective and efficient management
information systems. Prerequisites: MIS 331, MIS 345, senior standing, instructor consent.
Marketing
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 298 ~
MKT 315 Principles of Marketing – 3 credit hours. General survey of interactive business activities related to planning
product/service offer, price, promotion, and distribution in domestic and global market. Prerequisites: ECO 200 or ECO
232.
MKT 316 Buyer Behavior – 3 credit hours. Interdisciplinary approach to the analysis and interpretation of the buying process as it
relates to the development of market strategies. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 317 Retail Management – 3 credit hours. Essential principles and practices used in retail management involving
environmental analysis, store location, layout, buying, pricing, and merchandising. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 323 Promotion Management – 3 credit hours. Analysis of strategic promotional decisions through integrated marketing
communication activities and tools. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 324 Personal Selling – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the principles and practices of selling, the sales process, and sales
management. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 325 Product and Pricing Management – 3 credit hours. Intensive and analytical approach to product management, price
determination, and profit models. Prerequisites: MKT 315, MTH 112.
MKT 330 Principles of Electronic Commerce – 3 credit hours. An introduction and basic overview of e-commerce, including
building and maintaining the electronic store front and business interface, electronic shopping, electronic distribution,
order processing, payment, and customer relationship maintenance. Prerequisites: MGT 213 or its equivalent.
MKT 332 Merchandising Techniques – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the principles and practices of retail buying and selling
operations. Prerequisites: MKT 315, MKT 317, ACC 203, MTH 112.
MKT 341 Business-to-Business Marketing – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the principles and practices used in industrial markets with
emphasis on the purchasing function and business-to-business relationships. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 351 Marketing Channels – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the principles and practices used in the management of marketing
intermediaries with emphasis on physical distribution, storage, and handling of finished goods. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Marketing – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the form
of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related to the
student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development Services
(CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The student’s
faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to receive
ELO course credit. Prerequisites: MGT 250.
MKT 410 Marketing Research – 3 credit hours. Principles of scientific research methods in marketing and their application to
problem solving and decision-making. Prerequisites: MKT 315, MTH 112, ECO 271.
MKT 411 Advanced Marketing Research – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MKT 410; focuses on the implementation of the
marking research proposal, measurement instrument selection/design, data collection and analysis, and preparation of the
research report. Prerequisites: MKT 410.
MKT 423 Public Relations – 3 credit hours. Study of PR principles used in marketing to enhance brand equity and protect
corporate image. Focus on crisis management. Prerequisites: MKT 315, MKT 323.
MKT 450 Services Marketing – 3 credit hours. A course designed to introduce both the theories and practices of services
marketing. Emphasis is placed on the planning and management of customer-satisfaction-winning marketing activities in
the services sector and in general. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 455 Health Care Marketing – 3 credit hours. The purpose is to provide a thorough understanding of the principles and
concepts of marketing as they apply to health care organizations. Students will be exposed to markets composed of
varying degrees of managed care, and application from both a traditional fee-for-service approach and a managed care
framework will be discussed. The course will examine the application of marketing tools and strategies in today’s
dynamic health care environment. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 299 ~
MKT 464 Global Marketing and its Environment – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the adaptation and integration of the marketing
process in the development of marketing strategies by domestic firms with global operations. Special focus on the impact
of the cultural, economic, financial, and political/legal environments on marketing decisions. Prerequisites: MKT 315.
MKT 477 Marketing Management – 3 credit hours. Managerial approach to marketing decision-making focusing on the analysis
and interpretation of quantitative and qualitative marketing data. Prerequisites: MKT 315 and senior standing.
MKT 487 Strategic Marketing – 3 credit hours. Integration capstone course focusing on the strategic planning of all marketing
elements. Prerequisites: MKT 315, MKT 316, MKT 323, MKT 410, MKT 477.
Military Science
MSC 101 Military Science I-A – 2 credit hours. A broad overview of the history of ROTC, the ROTC program and its benefits to
the student. The positive aspects of a career as an Army officer include information on pay and allowances, the military
retirement system, advancement, and travel opportunities. Military customs and traditions are discussed along with the
role of the Army, the Army Reserves and the National Guard. Students receive instruction on land navigation, principles
of leadership and traits of a leader. Prerequisites: None.
MSC 102 Military Science I-B – 2 credit hours. A continuation of MSC 101. Prerequisites: MSC 101.
MSC 201 Military Science II-A – 2 credit hours. (Two, 2-hour class periods). The course consists of Instructions on the rules,
techniques, and formats of effective military communications through military correspondence and briefings. The course
covers the mission and functions of the various military branches. Students receive instruction on the organization,
mission and weapons of the rifle squad, platoon, and company, along with being familiarized with the organization of the
battalion, brigade, and divisional size units. The principles of war are analyzed to determine their proper employment.
The confluence and interaction of military affairs with diplomatic, political, social, economic, and intellectual trends in
society are addressed. Students are also provided instruction in map reading, which includes grid, scale and distance,
direction, azimuth and back azimuth, elevation and relief. Prerequisites: MSC 101, 102.
MSC 202 Military Science II-B – 2 credit hours. A continuation of MSC 202. Prerequisites: MSC 20l.
MSC 206 Basic Camp – 6 credit hours. A course designed to provide an orientation to students without military training
background and also giving students an opportunity to examine military life. Successful completion of a six-week
summer camp experience at Fort Knox, Kentucky, entitles the student completing the sophomore year to receive two
years placement credit. There is no obligation or commitment to military service beyond the basic camp for students who
elect not to enter the advanced program. Basic camp students earn more than $700.00 while participating in the summer
training at Fort Knox. Registration for academic credit for ROTC basic camp is optional. Students who have no desire to
receive academic credit for MSC 206 are not required to register for basic camp. However, prior registration and tuition
payment are required for those who wish to receive academic credit for successful completion of basic camp.
Prerequisites: None.
MSC 301 Military Science III-A – 3 credit hours. (Two, 3-hour classroom sessions, one 1-hour leadership development laboratory,
and Leader Development and Assessment Course of five (5) weeks duration). The course consists of instruction in
reference to platoon and squad level training, counseling, communication skills, human relations and various other
topics. Additionally, students receive instruction on the fundamentals of map reading which encompasses grid, scale and
distance, direction, elevation and relief, intersection and resection. Students are introduced to the fundamentals of tactical
operations, to include writing of combat orders, command and staff organizations, command/staff actions, command
relationships, communication systems, intelligence gathering, and the role of the various branches of the Army. Students
are taught first Aid and selected other subjects to prepare them for attendance at LDAC. Prerequisites: MSC 101, 102,
201, 202, or their equivalents.
MSC 302 Military Science III-B – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MSC 301. Prerequisites: MSC 301.
MSC 401 Military Science IV-A – 3 credit hours. (Three, 1-hour classroom sessions and one 2-hour leadership development
laboratory.) Students receive instruction on the analysis of selected leadership and management topics in the area of
training, logistics and personnel management. Instruction encompasses military correspondence, information and
decision papers, after action reports, briefings, Army personnel Management System, and post/installment support.
Students are presented instruction on the Military Justice System which includes search and seizure, non-punitive 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 300 ~
disciplinary measures and non-judicial punishment. Additionally, students receive instruction on military professional
ethics. The course concludes with selected pre-commissioning seminars dealing with topics of interest for the newly
commissioned Army officer. Prerequisites: PMS approval, MSC 301, MSC 302.
MSC 402 Military Science IV-B – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MSC 401. Prerequisites: MSC 401.
MSC 498 Military Science V-A – 2 credit hours. Students receive instruction encompassing briefings and selected military topics
as well as physical training. Prerequisites: Extension of scholarship benefits for approved cadets. Prerequisites: MSC
301, MSC 302, MSC 401, MSC 402.
MSC 499 Military Science V-B – 2 credit hours. A continuation of MSC 498. Prerequisites: MSC 498.
Mathematics
MTH 010 (Formerly MTH 100) Developmental Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Basic arithmetic, basic algebra and basic geometry
concepts. Included in its content are the four fundamental operations involving positive and negative real numbers,
rational numbers, and percent; solving linear equations and inequalities; and pertinent application problems. Credit hours
for this course may not be counted toward any degree requirement. Placement in this course is determined by
performance on a placement test. Prerequisites: None.
MTH 011 (Formerly MTH 101) Fundamentals of Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Graphing and linear systems, exponents and
polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, roots and radicals, solving quadratic equations, compound inequalities,
linear inequalities in two variables, variation, functions, and pertinent application problems. Credit hours for this course
may not be counted toward any degree requirement. Prerequisites: MTH 010 or a satisfactory score on the Mathematics
component of the COMPASS.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
MTH 012 (Formerly MTH 105) Intermediate Algebra – 3 credit hours. This course covers exponents, roots and radicals,
polynomial and rational expressions, functions and graphing, transformations of functions, quadratic and inverse
functions, and linear and non-linear systems of equations. Credit hours for this course may not be counted toward any
degree requirement.
Note: MTH 012 is an intensive intermediate algebra course designed for students in science programs, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) degree where MTH 125, Calculus I, is the initial course in their curriculum. This
course is designed to prepare students for MTH 115.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
MTH 013 (Formerly MTH 107) Modern Mathematics – 3 credit hours. The metric system, sets, base numeration systems, systems
of whole numbers, systems of integers, elementary number theory, elementary logic, relations, and functions.
Prerequisites: MTH 011 or a satisfactory score on a placement test.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
MTH 110 Finite Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Sets, counting, permutations, combinations, basic probability theory (including
Baye’s Theorem), statistical concepts (including binomial distributions and normal distribution), matrices and their
applications to Markov chains and decision theory. Additional topics may include symbolic logic, linear models, linear
programming, the simplex method and applications. This course is designed for students who are not majoring in
science, engineering, commerce, or mathematics. Prerequisites: MTH 011 or satisfactory placement test scores.
MTH 112 (Formerly MTH 103) Pre-Calculus Algebra – 3 credit hours. The algebra of polynomial, rational, exponential and
logarithmic functions; algebraic equations; linear and quadratic equations; linear and quadratic inequalities; systems of
equations and inequalities; and the binomial theorem. Additional topics may include matrices, Cramer’s rule, and
mathematical induction. Prerequisites: MTH 011 or a satisfactory score on a placement exam.
MTH 112E Pre-Calculus Algebra with Lab – 4 credit hours (3 clock hour lecture and 1 clock hour lab per week). The algebra of
polynomial, rational, exponential and logarithmic functions; algebraic equations; linear and quadratic equations; linear
and quadratic inequalities; systems of equations and inequalities; and the binomial theorem. Additional topics may
include matrices, Cramer’s rule, and mathematical induction. A quick review of prerequisite materials; graphing and
linear systems, exponents and polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, roots and radicals, solving quadratic
equations, compound inequalities, linear inequalities in two variables, variation, functions. Students will be required to
attend a 1-hour lab each week as part of the course. Prerequisites: MTH 010 or satisfactory score on a placement exam.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 301 ~
MTH 113 (Formerly MTH 104) Pre-Calculus Trigonometry – 3 credit hours. The study of (circular) trigonometric functions;
inverse trigonometric functions; trigonometric identities; and trigonometric equations. The course also covers vectors,
complex numbers, DeMoivre’s Theorem, and polar coordinates. Additional topics may include conic sections,
sequences, and using matrices to solve linear systems. Prerequisites: MTH 112 or a satisfactory score on a placement
exam.
MTH 115 Pre-Calculus Algebra and Trigonometry – 4 credit hours. This course covers functions, logarithms and exponentials,
trigonometric functions and inverse trigonometric functions, trigonometric identities and equations, vectors, complex
numbers, polar coordinates, systems of linear and quadratic equations/inequalities and the binomial theorem. MTH 115
is an intensive pre-calculus preparatory course designed for students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) degree programs where MTH 125, Calculus I, is the initial course of their degree program.
MTH 120 (Formerly MTH 130) Calculus and Its Applications – 3 credit hours. A broad overview of calculus taken primarily by
students majoring in commerce and business. The course includes differentiation and integration of algebraic,
exponential, and logarithmic functions and applications to business and economics. The course also includes functions of
several variables, partial derivatives with applications, LaGrange multipliers, L’Hopital’s rule, and multiple integration
with applications. This course does not substitute for MTH 125 or MTH 126. Prerequisites: MTH 112.
MTH 125 (Formerly MTH 171) Calculus I – 4 credit hours. Limits; derivatives of algebraic, trigonometric, exponential, and
logarithmic functions; applications of the derivative; differentials; maximum and minimum problems; curve sketching
using calculus; and the definite integral and its applications to area. This is the first of three courses in the basic calculus
sequence taken primarily by students in science, engineering and mathematics. Prerequisites: MTH 113 or MTH 115 or
satisfactory placement test scores for all students except Engineering majors. The prerequisite for Engineering majors is
MTH 115.
MTH 126 (Formerly MTH 172) Calculus II – 4 credit hours. Applications of integration including volume, arc length and work;
techniques of integration; infinite series; polar coordinates and polar graphs; vectors in the plane and in space, parametric
equations; curves in the plane and in space; and lines and planes in space. This is the second of three courses in the basic
calculus sequence. Prerequisites: MTH 125 or MTH 145.
MTH 145 (Formerly MTH 171H) Calculus I Honors – 4 credit hours. The content of MTH 125 at an accelerated pace including a
major application project. This course covers limits; derivatives of algebraic, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic
functions; applications of the derivative; differentials; maximum and minimum problems; curve sketching using
calculus; and the definite integral and its applications to area. Prerequisites: MTH 113 or satisfactory placement test
scores.
MTH 146 (Formerly MTH 172H) Calculus II Honors – 4 credit hours. Content of MTH 126 at an accelerated pace including a
major application project. This course covers applications of integration including volume, arc length, and work;
techniques of integration; infinite series; polar coordinates and polar graphs; vectors; parametric equations; curves in the
plane and in space; and lines and planes in space. Prerequisites: MTH 125 or MTH 145.
MTH 200 Mathematical Computations – 1 credit hour. A comprehensive study of the interrelation of topics from Pre-Calculus
Algebra and Trigonometry, Calculus I and II, and Linear Algebra. This course may not be used as a designated
Mathematics elective in any degree program; however it may be used to fulfill, in part, elective credits (free electives)
required in degree programs in the Department of Mathematics.
MTH 227 (Formerly MTH 201) Calculus III – 4 credit hours. Vector-valued functions; functions of several variables, partial
derivatives and their applications; quadric surfaces, multiple integration, and vector calculus, including line and surface
integrals; curl and divergence, Green’s Theorem, and Stoke’s Theorem. This is the third of three courses in the basic
calculus sequence. Prerequisites: MTH 126 or MTH 146.
MTH 235 Mathematics for Elementary Teachers – 3 credit hours. Topics in the K-6 mathematics curriculum: counting, integers,
the fundamental operations of arithmetic, ratio and proportion, elementary geometry, uncertainty and data interpretation.
Problem solving, investigation, reasoning, communication, and the use of technology are integral parts of this course.
This course is not open to Mathematics or Mathematics-Secondary Education majors. Prerequisites: MTH 112.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 302 ~
MTH 237 (Formerly MTH 203) Introduction to Linear Algebra – 3 credit hours. Introduction to theory of matrices, determinants,
methods of solving the linear system Ax = b via Gaussian elimination, Gauss-Jordan elimination, eigenvalues and
eigenvectors, diagonalization of matrices, real vector spaces, bases and dimension, linear transformations and inner
product spaces. Additional topics may include quadratic forms and applications of matrix theory in solving differential
equations. Prerequisites: MTH 126 or MTH 146.
MTH 238 (Formerly MTH 202) Applied Differential Equations – 3 credit hours. An introduction to numerical methods, qualitative
behavior of first order differential equations, techniques for solving separable and linear equations analytically, and
applications to various models, including populations, motions and chemical mixtures. Also taught are techniques for
solving higher order linear differential equations with constant coefficients, including the general theory and the method
of undetermined coefficients, reduction of order, and variation of parameters. Discussions include interpretation of the
behavior of solutions, and applications to physical models with higher order governing equations. The Laplace transform
as a tool for solving initial value problems with discontinuous inhomogeneous terms. Prerequisites: MTH 126 or MTH
146.
MTH 301 Abstract Algebra I – 3 credit hours. Sets, relations, and functions; properties of integers and induction; permutations;
groups, group homomorphisms, and quotient groups; Cartesian and direct products. Prerequisites: MTH 237.
MTH 302 Abstract Algebra II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MTH 301. Rings, ring homomorphisms, ideals, quotient rings;
integral domains; fields and polynomial extensions of fields. Prerequisites: MTH 301.
MTH 303 (PHY 303) Methods of Mathematical Physics – 4 credit hours. Vector calculus; partial differential equations; boundary
value problems. Also included are the Fourier series, Laplace transforms, and Green’s function methods. Prerequisites:
MTH 227.
MTH 305 Applied Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, differentials, power series,
binomial series, Maclaurin and Taylor series, and solution of elementary first order and second order differential
equations. Applications for engineering technology are included. This course is not open to Mathematics or Secondary
Education Mathematics majors. Prerequisites: MTH 126 or MTH 146.
MTH 307 Geometry – 3 credit hours. A study of plane and solid Euclidean geometry from the modern viewpoint; relationships of
Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry, selected topics of affine and projective geometry. This course is open to
Elementary and Secondary Education majors; this course is not open to Mathematics majors. Prerequisites: MTH 112.
MTH 324 (ST 324) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Descriptive statistics, basic probability (set, counting rule, permutation,
combination, calculating probabilities, conditional probabilities and Bayes rule), random variable, discrete and
continuous probability distributions (binomial, Poisson, hyper-geometric and normal), point and interval estimation,
hypothesis testing, correlation and regression, goodness-of-fit, analysis of variance, and contingency tables. It also
includes computer-assisted data analysis with emphasis on the interpretation of results generated by software packages
such as SAS, SPSS, STATPAK and others. Prerequisites: MTH 112 with MinGrade of C.
MTH 327 (ST 327) Applied Regression Analysis – 3 credit hours. A study of least squares; simple, polynomial and multiple linear
regression including residual and lack-of-fit analysis; simple multiple, partial, and multiple-partial correlation; analysis
of covariance; model building algorithms, analysis of variance, and computer-assisted data analysis. Prerequisites: (ST
324 or MTH 324), MTH 125.
MTH 344 (ST 344) Design and Analysis of Experiments I – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamental concepts and basic
principles of design, construction and analysis of experimental designs. Designs to be included are completely
randomized complete block, Latin square, Greco-Latin square, split-plot, multiple comparison, and factorial.
Prerequisites: ST 327 or MTH 327.
MTH 351 Introduction to Real Analysis I – 3 credit hours. Logical connectives; quantifiers, inductive and deductive methods of
proof; negation; contrapositive; sets; relations and functions. Topics include the completeness axiom, topology of the
real line, compact sets, sequences, subsequences, Cauchy sequences, limits, continuity, and uniform continuity.
Prerequisites: MTH 227.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 303 ~
MTH 352 Introduction to Real Analysis II – 3 credit hours. Continuation of MTH 351 which includes discussions of
differentiation, Riemann integral, derivatives of integrals, infinite series, absolute and conditional convergence, power
series, Taylor series, sequences and series of functions, and modes of convergence. Prerequisites: MTH 351.
MTH 355 (ST 355) Applied Statistics – 3 credit hours. Collection and presentation of data; measures of central tendency and
variability; skewness, binomial, normal, Chi-square, t-and F-distributions; estimation; confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing; correlation coefficient; and analysis of variance. This course includes laboratory activities. This
course is designed for majors in biology, zoology, botany, medical technology, pre-veterinary medicine, and pre-nursing.
This course is not open to mathematics majors or applied statistics minors. Prerequisites: MTH 112.
MTH 357 Computers and the Teaching of Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Introduction to computer usage and applications of
technology in mathematics instruction, development of curriculum materials using mathematical software packages;
laboratory demonstrations and projects. This course is open to Secondary Education Mathematics majors. This course is
not open to Mathematics majors. Prerequisites: MTH 125.
MTH 371 Number Theory – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the theory of numbers through a study of divisibility; congruencies;
quadratic reciprocity; Diophantine equations; factorization; algebraic numbers. Prerequisites: MTH 237.
MTH 383 Numerical Analysis – 3 credit hours. Introduction to numerical methods for interpolation; evaluating roots of
polynomials, systems of equations; integration; differentiation; differential equations; approximation and error.
Prerequisites: MTH 227 and CS 102.
MTH 401 History of Mathematics – 1 credit hour. A course designed to explore and study topics in the history of mathematics.
Prerequisites: MTH 125.
MTH 444 (ST 444) Applied Time Series Analysis – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals concepts; classical regression models as
forecasting models, exponential smoothings, stationary and nonstationary models, additive and multiplicative
decompositions, moving average, autoregressive, model identification, forecasting techniques, seasonal model
identification, model building and forecasting with ARMA and ARIMA processes, estimation in MA, AR, ARMA and
ARIMA processes. Box-Jenkins methodology, computer aided modeling, applications. Prerequisites: (MTH 324 or ST
324) with a MinGrade of C.
MTH 452 Complex Analysis – 3 credit hours. The complex numbers, functions, continuity of complex variables, differentiability,
Cauchy-Riemann conditions, contour integral theorem, sequences and series, and the calculus of residues. Prerequisites:
MTH 227.
MTH 453 (ST 453) Probability and Statistics – 3 credit hours. Probability axioms, methods of enumeration; conditional probability,
independence, empirical frequency distribution, discrete and continuous random variables, expectation, moment
generating functions, joint distributions, sums of random variables, and limit theorems. Prerequisites: MTH 126 or MTH
146.
MTH 454 Advanced Calculus – 3 credit hours. Topics of advanced nature in differential and integral calculus. Emphasis is placed
on the understanding of concepts and on the basic principles of analysis. Prerequisites: MTH 227.
MTH 473 (ST 473) Statistics – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the theory of statistics. Topics include sampling distributions,
estimation, hypothesis testing, linear models, analysis of variance, nonparametric and distribution-free procedures.
Prerequisites: ST 453 or MTH 453.
MTH 480 Selected Topics in Mathematics – 3 credit hours. Discussion of current topics in algebra and/or analysis. Prerequisites:
MTH 301 or MTH 351 or instructor consent.
MTH 481 Senior Project – 3 credit hours. A course designed for mathematics majors who are conducting a senior mathematics
project under the direction of a mentor. This course is open only to Mathematics majors. Prerequisites: (MTH 301 or
MTH 351) or instructor consent.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Mathematics program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 304 ~
MTH 482 Independent Study – 1 credit hour. A course designed for investigative study in an area of contemporary mathematics
under the supervision of a senior mathematics instructor. Prerequisites: MTH 237 or instructor consent.
Music
(Note: Choral, ensemble, performance, theory, band and symphony courses cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements
in Areas I-IV.
MUS 001 Recital Attendance I – 0 credit hour. A non-credit course required for music majors. The course provides listening and
performance opportunities in formal and informal concert settings. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 002 Recital Attendance II – 0 credit hour. A non-credit course required for music majors. The course provides listening and
performance opportunities in formal and informal concert settings. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 003 Recital Attendance III – 0 credit hour. A non-credit course required for music majors. The course provides listening and
performance opportunities in formal and informal concert settings. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 004 Recital Attendance IV – 0 credit hour. A non-credit course required for music majors. The course provides listening and
performance opportunities in formal and informal concert settings. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 005 Recital Attendance V – 0 credit hour. A non-credit course required for music majors. The course provides listening and
performance opportunities in formal and informal concert settings. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 101 Music Appreciation – 3 credit hours. A study in the fundamentals of music such as melody, harmony, rhythm, form
meter, and notation. The biographies of selected composers and some of their compositions are highlighted so as to
enhance musical understanding. Literary and graphic arts are integrated to assist the student in correlating various
cultural influences with music in certain times and places. Music listening is stressed and classroom activities are often
coordinated with out-of-class assignments like television programs, lyceum attractions, student recitals and community
concerts. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 102 Fundamentals of Music – 3 credit hours. An introductory course that covers the rudimentary fundamentals of music
theory, including the basic properties of notation, scales, intervals, triads, and rhythmic notation. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 103 Music Theory I – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide training in music theory and fundamentals of sight
singing. Melodic and rhythmic dictation and keyboard are administered to further provide laboratory experiences for
musical growth. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 104 Music Theory II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of MUS 103. More advanced aural, visual, and theoretical subjects are
studied. Prerequisites: MUS 103.
MUS 113 The Male Glee Club – 1 credit hour. This organization is comprised of selected male voices from the University Choir
and the University at large. A male quartet is usually lifted from this group. Prerequisites: MUS 123 or MUS 124.
MUS 114 The Male Glee Club II – 1 credit hour. This organization is comprised of selected male voices from the University Choir
and the University at large. A male quartet is usually lifted from this group. Prerequisites: MUS 123 or MUS 124.
MUS 115 Vocal Jazz Ensemble I – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of jazz and popular vocal music. Ensemble may
include choreography, performance with larger ensembles, and off-campus concerts. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 116 Vocal Jazz Ensemble II – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of jazz and popular vocal music. Ensemble may
include choreography, performance with larger ensembles, and off-campus concerts. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 117 The Female Ensemble I – 1 credit hour. Selected voices with music-reading aptitude and a willingness to adhere to the
highest standards of musical interpretation and preparation will be admitted to membership in this group.
MUS 118 Voice Class – 1 credit hour. Instruction of elementary vocal techniques, methods and procedures for choral and solo
singing. Focus will be given to the essentials of voice production, breath control, sight-singing, diction, and performance.
A competency-based approach to instruction is used. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 305 ~
MUS 120 Piano Ensemble I – 1 credit hour. Learning and exploring piano ensemble literature including compositions for 4-hand, 6-
hand, or piano/keyboard ensembles for two of more piano/keyboard instruments depending on instrument availability and
enrollment.
MUS 121 Piano Ensemble II – 1 credit hour. Continuation of skills begun in MUS 120, Piano Ensemble I. Learning and exploring
piano ensemble literature including compositions for 4-hand, 6-hand, or piano/keyboard ensembles for two of more
piano/keyboard instruments depending on instrument availability and enrollment.
MUS 122 The University Choir I – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 123 The University Choir II – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 124 Percussion Ensemble – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for percussion. Prerequisites:
instructor consent.
MUS 126 The Stage Band – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of jazz band literature. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 128 The Woodwind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for woodwinds.
Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 131 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for brasses. Prerequisites:
instructor consent.
MUS 133 Applied Music I, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 134 Applied Music II, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 135 Applied Music I, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 136 Applied Music II, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 137 Applied Music I, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 138 Applied Music II, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 139 Applied Music I, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 306 ~
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 140 Applied Music II, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 141 Applied Music I, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 142 Applied Music II, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 143 Applied Music I, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 144 Applied Music II, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 145 Applied Music I, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 146 Applied Music II, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 149 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 150 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 151 Applied Music I, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 152 Applied Music II, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 153 University Marching Band – 1 credit hour. A course designed to give students training and experience in playing various
instruments in marching formation techniques and field pageantry. The Marching Band makes frequent public
appearances on and off campus. The Band also participates in national and state observances and often shares its talents
with adjacent communities during holiday periods. Prerequisites: Audition.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 307 ~
MUS 154 Symphonic Band – 1 credit hour. The organization strives for superb musicianship and is presented in several concerts
during the second semester on and off-campus. Prerequisites: Audition during the first semester.
MUS 155 Applied Music I, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 156 Applied Music II, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 159 Applied Music I, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 160 Applied Music II, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 161 Applied Music I, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 162 Applied Music II, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 171 Applied Music I, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 172 Applied Music II, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 173 Guitar Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Guitar Ensemble is designed to give students training and exercise in guitar ensemble
literature. The ensemble performs on and off campus.
MUS 174 Independent Music Study – 3 credit hours. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 181 Applied Music I, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 308 ~
MUS 182 Applied Music II, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 183 Applied Music I, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 184 Applied Music II, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 187 Applied Music I, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 188 Applied Music II, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 189 Applied Music I, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 190 Applied Music II, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 191 Applied Music I, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 192 Applied Music II, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 205 Music Theory III – 3 credit hours. A study of diatonic seventh chords and their inversions, harmonization of melodies
and figured bass lines, and the use of dominant sevenths in four-parts writing. Melodic, harmonic and dictation is
included. Analytic techniques are studied through various Classical and Romantic compositions. Prerequisites: MUS
103, MUS 104.
MUS 206 Music Theory IV – 3 credit hours. A thorough study of borrowed chords, secondary dominants, and other chromatic
harmonies Other topics include fundamentals of orchestration, ninths, elevenths and thirteenths, non-tertian harmonies,
and serial music. Dictation, keyboard harmony and analysis are included. Prerequisites: MUS 205.
MUS 208 Upper Brasswinds Class – 1 credit hour. A course that focuses on sight reading, technique, tone and other factors
necessary for competency and pedagogy with upper brasswinds. (Laboratory fee). Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 309 ~
MUS 210 Lower Brasswinds Class – 1 credit hour. The study of instruments which fall into the general category of lower brasses.
The class is intended to give the student broad experiences with developing knowledge and pedagogy. (Laboratory fee).
Prerequisites: MUS 208.
MUS 212 Percussion Class – 1 credit hour. An introduction to snare drumming rudiments. Tympani fundamentals such as pedal
and hand tuning, and other matters related to percussion techniques, are covered in this course. (Laboratory Fee).
Prerequisites: None.
MUS 219 Vocal Diction – 1 credit hour. The study of vocal mechanisms, phonetics, and related exercises to improve articulation,
pronunciation, and expressive intonation. This course will provide the student with a basic knowledge of Italian, French,
and German diction, the International Phonetic Alphabet (PA) and its uses in vocal performance. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 220 Piano Ensemble III – 1 credit hour. Continuation of skills begun in MUS 121, Piano Ensemble II. Learning and exploring
piano ensemble literature including compositions for 4-hand, 6-hand, or piano/keyboard ensembles for two of more
piano/keyboard instruments depending on instrument availability and enrollment.
MUS 221 Piano Ensemble IV – 1 credit hour. Continuation of skills begun in MUS 220, Piano Ensemble III. Learning and exploring
piano ensemble literature including compositions for 4-hand, 6-hand, or piano/keyboard ensembles for two of more
piano/keyboard instruments depending on instrument availability and enrollment.
MUS 222 The University Choir I – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 223 The University Choir II – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 226 The Stage Band – 1 credit hour. Stage Band member is confined to music majors and minors; or in special instances, to
persons who are performing members in one of the large musical organizations. This group is established to provide
students with laboratory exposure to jazz, standard literature in the popular music field and some varieties of rock music.
However, good musicianship is never sacrificed.
MUS 230 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 231 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 233 Applied Music III, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 234 Applied Music IV, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 235 Applied Music III, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 236 Applied Music IV, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 310 ~
MUS 237 Applied Music III, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 238 Applied Music IV, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 239 Applied Music III, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 240 Applied Music IV, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 241 Applied Music III, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 242 Applied Music IV, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 243 Applied Music III, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 244 Applied Music IV, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 245 Applied Music III, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 246 Applied Music IV, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 249 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 250 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 311 ~
MUS 251 Applied Music III, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 252 Applied Music IV, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 253 University Marching Band – 1 credit hour. A course designed to give students training and experience in playing various
instruments in marching formation techniques and field pageantry. The Marching Band makes frequent public
appearances on and off campus. The Band also participates in national and state observances and often shares its talents
with adjacent communities during holiday periods. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 254 Symphonic Band – 1 credit hour. The organization strives for superb musicianship and is presented in several concerts
during the second semester on and off-campus. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 255 Applied Music III, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 256 Applied Music IV, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 259 Applied Music III, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 260 Applied Music IV, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 261 Applied Music III, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 262 Applied Music VI, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 263 Piano Skills I – 2 credit hours. Experience in sight-reading, playing by ear, modulation, open score reading, transposition,
and improvisation at the keyboard.
MUS 264 Piano Skills II – 2 credit hours. Continuation of skills begun in Piano Skills I: Experience in sight-reading, playing by ear,
modulation, open score reading, transposition, and improvisation at the keyboard.
MUS 271 Applied Music III, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 312 ~
MUS 272 Applied Music IV, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 273 Guitar Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Guitar Ensemble is designed to give students training and exercise in guitar ensemble
literature. The ensemble performs on and off campus.
MUS 274 Independent Music Study – 3 credit hours. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 281 Applied Music III, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 282 Applied Music IV, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 283 Applied Music III, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 284 Applied Music IV, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 287 Applied Music III, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 288 Applied Music IV, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 289 Applied Music III, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 290 Applied Music IV, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 291 Applied Music III, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 292 Applied Music IV, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 313 ~
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 300 Junior Recital – 1 credit hour. The Junior Recital is a course for music majors with a Performance Concentration and
usually comes in the Junior Year of an applied voice or Instrumental study. The recital demonstrates representative
works from various musical periods and represents the culmination of five to six semesters of applied music study.
MUS 301 Music for Elementary Schools – 2 credit hours. In this course the candidate will acquire the basic knowledge, learning
theories, pedagogy, and experience necessary for handling music classes at the upper and lower grade elementary school
levels. This course demonstrates how to apply Piaget's Operations, Revised Bloom's Taxonomy, Kodaly's Scope and
Sequence, and Bruner's Curriculum Spiral to planning the music curriculum for each grade level. Many different
examples of evaluative and assessment techniques are demonstrated. Special emphasis is placed on developing skills and
learning pedagogy on xylophones, other percussion instruments, the auto-harp, and the recorder. Pedagogy includes Orff,
Kodaly, Dalcroze, and Suzuki. Singing, games, rhythmic and creative activities, dramatizations and movement will be
stressed. The "Singlish Curriculum" for ESL students will be introduced. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 303 Music History and Literature I – 2 credit hours. A general survey of music history from Antiquity through the Baroque
era. Social and political data, art, and literature are correlated with certain phases of the course. Listening is a very
significant part of the course. Prerequisites: MUS 103, MUS 104, MUS 205.
MUS 304 Music History and Literature II – 2 credit hours. Special emphasis is placed on contributions from the Classical,
Romantic and Contemporary eras. Listening is a major component of the course also. Prerequisites: MUS 303.
MUS 305 Music Technology – 1 credit hour. An introduction to audio hardware and software used in music creation and music
performance. Includes audio technology used for live sound and recording studios. Guide practice utilizing music
notation software, sequencing, sampling, synthesizers, Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) and virtual
instruments via a digital audio workstation (DAW) included.. Prerequisites: MUS 206.
MUS 307 World Music – 2 credit hours. A general survey of world music history. Music from the following regions are
introduced: Africa, The Americas, The Middle East, Asia, Oceania, & Europe. Particular emphasis is placed on the
cultural, social, political, economic, technological and artistic developments from ancient music through the present.
Prerequisites: MUS 304.
MUS 308 Introduction to American Music – 2 credit hours. A general survey of American music history. Music from native
American peoples, the colonial period, and developments from the early stages of the United States up through
contemporary classical and popular music innovations will be discussed. Emphasis is placed on the cultural, social,
political, economic, artistic and technological developments from pre-1500 through the present. Prerequisites: MUS 304.
MUS 309 Opera Studies – 2 credit hours. The study of all phases of operatic and musical theatre production, with emphasis on and
participation in staged operatic and musical theatre excerpts. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 310 Keyboard Literature and Pedagogy – 3 credit hours. A study of keyboard literature from Baroque to the present.
Additionally, current and expanded pedagogy concepts and materials for teaching students.
MUS 312 Woodwinds Class (Single Reeds) – 1 credit hour. The student is introduced to single-reed woodwinds, along with
applicable pedagogy and literature. (Laboratory fee). Prerequisites: Junior standing.
MUS 313 Woodwinds Class (Double Reeds) – 1 credit hour. Introduction to double-reed woodwinds, along with applicable
pedagogy and literature. (Laboratory fee). Prerequisites: MUS 312.
MUS 314 Strings Class I – 1 credit hour. A practical performance course in string instruments. Elementary performing ability on
violin, viola, cello, and string bass will be emphasized. Fundamentals of string playing and pedagogy are also taught.
Prerequisites: For music majors only.
MUS 315 Strings Class II – 1 credit hour. A practical performance course in string instruments. Intermediate performing ability on
violin, viola, cello, and string bass will be emphasized. Fundamentals of string playing and pedagogy are also taught.
Prerequisites: MUS 314.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 314 ~
MUS 316 Conducting I – 1 credit hour. A study of the details of expression, score reading (choral and instrumental), words and
symbols, technique, program building, and other factors. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 317 Conducting II – 1 credit hour. Serious attention to the more practical aspects of conducting as students are granted
opportunities to direct various ensembles during rehearsals and public performances. Prerequisites: MUS 316.
MUS 318 Survey of Band Instruments – 2 credit hours. An opportunity for the student who concentrates on vocal music to develop
in this course to develop a basic knowledge of band instruments. He/she learns to use finger charts, and is given other
important and useful information. Where possible, a “hands-on” approach is adopted. Some attention is given to fretted
instruments. (Laboratory fee). Prerequisites: None.
MUS 319 Vocal Diction and Pedagogy – 2 credit hours. Introduction to International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA); study and practice
of Italian, French, and German diction. Prerequisites: MUS 151, MUS 152.
MUS 320 Form and Analysis – 3 credit hours. An intense study of musical structure and design in Baroque, Classical, Romantic,
and Contemporary compositions. Students analyze and compare small and large forms. Prerequisites: MUS 205, MUS
206.
MUS 322 The University Choir I – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 323 The University Choir II – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 326 The Stage Band – 1 credit hour. Stage Band member is confined to music majors and minors; or in special instances, to
persons who are performing members in one of the large musical organizations. This group is established to provide
students with laboratory exposure to jazz, standard literature in the popular music field and some varieties of rock music.
However, good musicianship is never sacrificed.
MUS 327 Music Fundamentals for Classroom Teachers – 2 credit hours. In this course, the student will acquire the basic
knowledge and experience necessary for handling music activities at the upper and lower grade elementary school levels
as well as at the middle school level. Special emphasis is placed on piano skills, conducting, developing skills with
melody and chording instruments as well as fretted instruments. (Pre-Elementary, Elementary, and Special Education
Majors only). Prerequisites: None.
MUS 329 Intro to Music Business – 3 credit hours.
MUS 330 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 331 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 333 Applied Music V, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 334 Applied Music VI, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 335 Applied Music V, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 315 ~
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 336 Applied Music VI, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 337 Applied Music V, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 338 Applied Music VI, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 339 Applied Music VI, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 340 Applied Music VII, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 341 Applied Music V, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 342 Applied Music VI, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 343 Applied Music V, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 344 Applied Music VI, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 345 Applied Music V, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 346 Applied Music VI, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 316 ~
MUS 347 Collaborative Piano I – 1 credit hour. One hour per week of assigned piano collaboration in vocal and/or instrumental
teaching studios and one hour per week class meeting with the collaborative piano teacher for collaborative piano
instruction and coaching.
MUS 348 Collaborative Piano II – 1 credit hour. Continuation of skills begun in MUS 347 Collaborative Piano I: One hour per week
of assigned piano collaboration in vocal and/or instrumental teaching studios, one hour per week class meeting with the
collaborative piano teacher for instruction and coaching.
MUS 349 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 350 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 351 Applied Music V, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 352 Applied Music VI, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 353 University Marching Band – 1 credit hour. A course designed to give students training and experience in playing various
instruments in marching formation techniques and field pageantry. The Marching Band makes frequent public
appearances on and off campus. The Band also participates in national and state observances and often shares its talents
with adjacent communities during holiday periods. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 354 Symphonic Band – 1 credit hour. The organization strives for superb musicianship and is presented in several concerts
during the second semester on and off-campus. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 355 Applied Music V, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 356 Applied Music VI, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 357 Piano Literature I – 3 credit hours. A detailed study of compositional styles, idioms and trends in music written for the
piano and its predecessors during the Renaissance, Baroque, and Classical Eras.
MUS 358 Piano Literature II – 3 credit hours. A detailed study of compositional styles, idioms, and trends in music written for the
piano from the Romantic Era to the present.
MUS 359 Applied Music V, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 360 Applied Music VI, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 317 ~
MUS 361 Applied Music V, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 362 Applied Music VI, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 363 Piano Pedagogy 1 – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of professional piano teaching. Basic study of concepts necessary for
successful individual & group piano teaching from pre-school through the elementary level. Detailed Examination of
method books, graduated piano curricula, and piano technique curricula and methods. Observation and student teaching
required.
MUS 364 Piano Pedagogy II – 3 credit hours. Continuation of skills begun in Piano Pedagogy I. Teaching beginning, intermediate,
and/or advanced level piano to students of all ages. Overview of the history of Piano Pedagogy and career possibilities for
piano teachers. Detailed examination of teaching methods and literature. Students will learn to identify/resolve
musical/interpretative and technical challenges in literature and develop strategies for sequencing teaching literature.
Observation and student teaching required.
MUS 371 Applied Music V, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 372 Applied Music VI, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 373 Guitar Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Guitar Ensemble is designed to give students training and exercise in guitar ensemble
literature. The ensemble performs on and off campus.
MUS 374 Independent Music Study – 3 credit hours. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 381 Applied Music V, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 382 Applied Music VI, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 383 Applied Music V, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 384 Applied Music VI, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 387 Applied Music V, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 318 ~
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 388 Applied Music VI, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 389 Applied Music V, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 390 Applied Music VI, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 391 Applied Music V, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 392 Applied Music VI, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 400 Senior Recital – 3 credit hours. The Senior Recital is a course for music majors with a music-teaching or performance
concentration. The culminating performance represents musical works from various musical eras and occurs after eight
semesters of applied music study on an instrument or voice.
MUS 401 Teaching Instrumental Music for Secondary Schools – 2 credit hours. This course focuses on the methods and techniques
for teaching instrumental music in grades 6-12. Topics include instrumental repertoire, recruitment and retention,
teaching beginning musicians, leading rehearsals, performance preparation, student and ensemble assessment best
practices, program evaluation and technology for music teachers. The history, philosophy and administration of music
education programs are also emphasized. Prerequisites: MUS 301.
MUS 402 Teaching Choral Music for Secondary Schools – 2 credit hours. This course focuses on the methods and techniques for
teaching choral music in grades 6-12. Topics include choral repertoire, recruitment and retention, teaching the changing
male voice, leading rehearsals, performance preparation, concertizing and tours, student and ensemble assessment best
practices, program evaluation and technology for music teachers. The history, philosophy, funding and administration of
music education programs are also emphasized. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 403 Counterpoint – 2 credit hours. A general course in the study and writing of 18th century counterpoint. Score analysis and
listening are included. Prerequisites: MUS 205.
MUS 405 Choral Arranging – 2 credit hours. An introduction to the process of arranging music in various styles and for various
vocal combinations. Prerequisites: MUS 206.
MUS 406 Instrumental Arranging – 2 credit hours. An introduction to the process of arranging music for various instrumental
combinations and styles. Prerequisites: MUS 206.
MUS 408 Survey of Black Music – 2 credit hours. Chronological survey of origins, traditions, practices, and development of black
music. Open to all students. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 418 Jazz Theory I – 2 credit hours. A course designed to promote skills in arranging for the jazz ensemble. Prerequisites:
MUS 206.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 319 ~
MUS 419 Jazz Theory II – 2 credit hours. Advanced skills in arranging for the jazz ensemble. Prerequisites: MUS 418.
MUS 422 The University Choir I – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 423 The University Choir II – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of works representative of a wide spectrum of choral
literature for mixed voices. Open to all university students. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
MUS 426 The Stage Band – 1 credit hour. Stage Band member is confined to music majors and minors; or in special instances, to
persons who are performing members in one of the large musical organizations. This group is established to provide
students with laboratory exposure to jazz, standard literature in the popular music field and some varieties of rock music.
However, good musicianship is never sacrificed.
MUS 430 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 431 Brasswind Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Persons who play in this ensemble are selected on the basis of musical competence,
which includes music-reading and playing skills. In addition, it is expected that all players will meet their responsibilities
with punctuality and maturity.
MUS 433 Applied Music VII, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 434 Applied Music VIII, Violin – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 435 Applied Music VII, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 436 Applied Music VIII, Viola – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 437 Applied Music VII, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 438 Applied Music VIII, Cello – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 439 Applied Music VII, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 320 ~
MUS 440 Applied Music VIII, Double Bass – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 441 Applied Music VII, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 442 Applied Music VIII, Piano – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 443 Applied Music VII, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 444 Applied Music VIII, Euphonium – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 445 Applied Music VII, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 446 Applied Music VIII, Flute – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 449 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 450 String Ensemble. – 1 credit hour. The study and performance of ensemble literature for strings. Prerequisites: instructor
consent.
MUS 451 Applied Music VII, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 452 Applied Music VIII, Voice – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 453 University Marching Band – 1 credit hour. A course designed to give students training and experience in playing various
instruments in marching formation techniques and field pageantry. The Marching Band makes frequent public
appearances on and off campus. The Band also participates in national and state observances and often shares its talents
with adjacent communities during holiday periods. Prerequisites: Audition.
MUS 454 Symphonic Band – 1 credit hour. The organization strives for superb musicianship and is presented in several concerts
during the second semester on and off-campus. Prerequisites: Audition.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 321 ~
MUS 455 Applied Music VII, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 456 Applied Music VIII, Saxophone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 459 Applied Music VII, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 460 Applied Music VIII, French Horn – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 461 Applied Music VII, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 462 Applied Music VIII, Trumpet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 463 Internship in Piano Pedagogy I – 2 credit hours. Teaching of adult beginners and/or children from pre-school through high
school in private lessons and/or groups under faculty supervision.
MUS 464 Internship in Piano Pedagogy II – 2 credit hours. Continuation of skills begun in Internship in Piano Pedagogy I. Teaching
of adult beginners and/or children from pre-school through high school in private lessons and/or groups under faculty
supervision.
MUS 470 Music Business Internship – 3 credit hours. This course occurs in the senior year of a music major with a concentration
in business. The student along with the university supervisor selects a business in radio, television or a production
company/studio and spends several weeks learning and practicing and applying skills learned in music and business
classes.
MUS 471 Applied Music VII, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 472 Applied Music VIII, Clarinet – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 473 Guitar Ensemble – 1 credit hour. Guitar Ensemble is designed to give students training and exercise in guitar ensemble
literature. The ensemble performs on and off campus.
MUS 474 Independent Music Study – 3 credit hours. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 322 ~
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 481 Applied Music VII, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 482 Applied Music VIII, Percussion – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 483 Applied Music VII, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in accordance
with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate technical
competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical understanding,
expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 484 Applied Music VIII, Tuba – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 487 Applied Music VII, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 488 Applied Music VIII, Bassoon – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 489 Applied Music VII, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 490 Applied Music VIII, Trombone – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 491 Applied Music VII, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 492 Applied Music VIII, Guitar – 1 credit hour. In the applied music courses, basic technical principles are stress in
accordance with the student’s current performance ability. Strategies are chosen or designed thereafter to escalate
technical competence developmentally, to maximize the student’s growth and technical proficiency, musical
understanding, expressive performance and musical taste. Prerequisites: None.
MUS 495 Internship – 12 credit hours. Students majoring in music-teaching must complete an internship in a public school
approved by the Music/Teacher Education Program. Prerequisites: SED 409, passing PRAXIS II score.
Nutrition & Hospitality Management
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 323 ~
NHM 102L Principles of Nutrition – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). A study of
nutrients and their application in the selection of food to meet the nutritional needs of family members. Prerequisites:
None.
NHM 103 Nutrition Today – 2 credit hours. A study of nutrients and their application to the selection of food to meet the nutritional
needs of the individual. Emphasis is placed on nutrition, food, general health concerns, and wellness as related to the
consumer. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 201L Science of Food Preparation – 4 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x3 and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Scientific
concepts of basic food cookery integrated into menu planning, preparation, and service of meals. Nutrition and economy
of time and cost are emphasized. Prerequisites: NHM 102L.
NHM 202 Introduction to Hospitality Management – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the history of the hotel/motel, restaurant,
travel, and tourism industry. The overview will cover the historical development of the industry and three major
functions in the various types of establishments or operations. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 206L Facilities Planning – 1-3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). Planning of food
service facilities with an emphasis on human engineering, layout, design, selection of equipment, and management
planning decisions. Prerequisites: None
NHM 301L Food Service Operations I – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). Basic
principles of purchasing food and beverages, as well as non-food items, with particular attention to product identification
and to the receiving, storing, and issuing sequence. Planning, selling, producing, and serving a weekly meal employing
learned information is an integral part of this course. Prerequisites: NHM 201L.
NHM 302L Food Service Operations II – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). A
continuation of NHM 301L with management of production and service for various types of food service operations
included. Prerequisites: NHM 301L.
NHM 304 Professional Beverage Management – 3 credit hours. A study of beverage systems, procurement, handling, and controls
of beverages, related legislation and beverage accounting. Course will also include familiarization with equipment,
design of facilities, and mixology. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 306L Nutrition through the Life Cycle – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x3 and 1 clock hour lab periods per week).
Application of the basic principles of nutrition to the dietaries for the child and mother from conception through the
adolescent period. Emphasis is placed on the relationship of diet to the growth and development of the infant and child.
Prerequisites: NHM 102L.
NHM 309L Professional Baking – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). Emphasis upon the
basic principles and techniques of professional baking will be emphasized throughout the course. The skills acquired will
prepare students for the field of baking. Prerequisites: NHM 201L.
NHM 310 Travel, Tourism, and Resort Management – 3 credit hours. A study of travel, tourism and resort management with
emphasis on concepts, terminology, demographics, financial significance, and current trends. The course will also
evaluate the economic, social, and political impact of travel and tourism. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 312L Buffets and Banquets – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). An exploration of
the sophisticated world of buffets and banquets, including planning, preparation, and service. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 401 Dietetics Capstone – 3 credit hours. This course reviews the key concepts in food and nutrition sciences; the nutrition
care for individuals and groups; food service systems; and management of food and nutrition programs and services.
Critical thinking skills and concepts of professionalism will be taught through an integrative case based approach.
Foundation knowledge and skills to assist students in preparing for the Registered Dietitian credentialing exam will be
reviewed including mathematical concepts and equations, test taking and preparation strategies. Prerequisites: NHM 302,
NHM 407L.
NHM 403 Quantity Food Management – 3 credit hours. A study of quantity food cookery and management problems as they
pertain to commercial, industrial, and other institutional food services. Merchandising menus, variety in menu planning, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 324 ~
and food preferences of customers will be included. Students will have an opportunity for study and laboratory
experiences in management of food preparation and services in a cafeteria. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 404L Nutrition for Early and Middle Childhood – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 2 clock hour lab periods per
week). A course designed to acquaint teachers of young children with basic nutritional principles and their applications
for nutrition education. Emphasis is placed on methods and techniques for teaching nutrition to young children.
Prerequisites: None.
NHM 405L Advanced Human Nutrition – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). A study of
the physiological and chemical factors involved in the absorption and metabolism of food nutrients. Prerequisites: CHE
252, CHE 252L, BIO 221, BIO 221L, BIO 222, BIO 222L, NHM 102L.
NHM 406L International Cuisine and Catering – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). An
introduction to special foods of various countries and the techniques used to prepare authentic menus. Preparation and
management of catering will also be covered in the course. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 407 Medical Nutrition Therapy I – 3 credit hours. A study of the modification of normal diets in the applications of nutrition
and medical therapy. Prerequisites: NHM 405L.
NHM 408L Medical Nutrition Therapy II – 3 credit hours (1 clock hour lecture x2 and 3 clock hour lab periods per week). Practical
experience in nutrition and medical therapy dietetics and in the community, (i.e., hospitals, dialysis units, nursing homes,
etc.) Prerequisites: NHM 407.
NHM 409L Experimental Foods – 3 credit hours. Two one-hour lectures and one, three-hour lab per week. A senior level course
designed to acquaint the students with the experimental study of foods, relative to why food is handled and prepared in a
certain manner, the significance of the effects of variations in treatments on food quality, and use of this knowledge can
be used to improve the quality of food products. Prerequisites: NHM 201L.
NHM 410 Community Nutrition – 3 credit hours. Two one-hour lectures and one, three-hour lab per week. A study of the
nutritional needs of a community and the exploration, identification, and analysis of nutritional needs of various target
groups such as schools, elderly, income, etc. Prerequisites: NHM 102L.
NHM 411 Housekeeping Operations – 3 credit hours. A course designed in three parts: (1) managing within the housekeeping
profession, (2) planning, organizing, and staffing new organizations, and (3) directing and controlling ongoing
housekeeping operations. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 412 Special Problems – 1-3 credit hours. A detailed advanced study selected from the field of nutrition, food service, or the
lodging industry which requires students to identify and complete research or independent study under the guidance of
an advisor. Prerequisites: None.
NHM 414 Hospitality Management Seminar – 1 credit hour. A study and discussion of current trends and problems in the
hospitality industry. Prerequisites: Senior classification.
Natural Resources & Environmental Sciences
NRE 101 Introduction to Plant Science – 4 credit hours. Study of the fundamental principles of science as related to the basic
aspects of plant growth, morphology, physiology, ecology, propagation, and utilization. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 170 Introduction to Environmental Science – 3 credit hours. A study of man both as a dominant force and as an inseparable
part of the ecosphere. Basic ecological concepts, pollution and pollution control, resources and resource use, human
manipulation of ecosystems, the law and environmental problems, the urban environment, problems of population
growth, and discussion of other specific environmental issues. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 199 Technology in Agricultural & Biological Sciences – 3 credit hours. This course is designed for freshman students who
plan to major in the “Agricultural Sciences” including Forestry, Environmental, Biological, Animal, Food, Family and
Consumer Sciences. The first part of the course will provide an overview of technological tools for writing reports, data
analyses, and presentations. The second part of the course will focus on advanced technology and its applications. This
will include geographic information system (GIS), statistics, precision agriculture, remote sensing, and online databases.
Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 325 ~
NRE 223 Introduction to Environmental Health Science – 3 credit hours. The fundamental of environmental health, covering
environmental control agencies, elements of the environment suffering from pollution, environmental pollutants and
their sources, effects of environmental pollution, and methods of pollution control. Prerequisites: (NRE 170, BIO 101,
BIO 101L, CHE 101, CHE 101L) or instructor consent.
NRE 251 Introduction to Soil Science – 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of soil science, a comprehensive study of physical,
chemical, and biological properties of soils and their applications to crop production and other land uses. (Audiotutorial). Prerequisites: None.
NRE 281 Introduction to Forestry – 3 credit hours. Principles and practices of forestry. Brief treatment of forest tree biology,
dendrology, forest ecology, hydrology, insects and diseases, mensuration, silvicultural methods, products, economics,
and management. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 282 Dendrology – 3 credit hours. Identification, classification, and silvics of commercially and ecologically important forest
plants in the United States. Prerequisites: NRE 281.
NRE 286 Wildlife Biology and Identification – 3 credit hours. Identification, distribution, life history, and behavior of North
American amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. Emphasis on ecological and zoological aspects of special relevance
to management. A laboratory and field course in species identification, techniques of age and sex determination, and
behavior analysis. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 306 Environmental Microbiology – 4 credit hours (3 clock hour lecture and 2 clock hour lab periods per week). This course
is an introduction to the rapidly evolving fields of microbial ecology and environmental microbiology. We are literally
surrounded and covered by microorganisms significant in the earth’s habitability and our own survival. Microbial
ecology and environmental microbiology attempt to document and enhance our understanding of the diversities and
activities of microbial communities and populations. Environmental microbiology has been revolutionized by molecular
and genomic technologies. Prerequisites: (BIO 101 and BIO 102) or BIO 103.
NRE 350 Soil Morphology, Genesis, and Classification – 4 credit hours. Soil characteristics used in soil survey and identification,
factors and processes of soil formation and principles of soil classification systems are addressed. Prerequisites: NRE
251.
NRE 351 Soil and Water Conservation – 3 credit hours. A study of soil and water conservation principles as related to wind and
water erosion control, water utilization and runoff control, irrigation and drainage principles relating to crop production.
Prerequisites: NRE 251 and junior or senior standing.
NRE 360 Cooperative Education – 1-6 credit hours. Relevant job-related experiences are arranged with federal and state
government or with private industry. Prior approval by student’s advisor is required. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 365 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems – 3 credit hours. An introduction to computer-assisted geographic
analysis technology used in the management, assessment, and inventory of natural resources. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 366 Climate and Global Change – 4 credit hours. Climate and global change; relationships between the sun and the earth; the
global structure and variations of the atmosphere and oceans; and the influence of humans and natural processes on the
climate system and its variability.
NRE 370 Natural Resource Conservation and Management – 3 credit hours. An ecological approach to basic conservation
principles and techniques. Introduction to policies and techniques for intelligent management and utilization of forests
and other natural resources. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 371 Forest Mensuration – 4 credit hours. An applied approach to forest measurements, including log, tree and stand
measurements, as well as data analysis. Training in commonly used measuring devices is included during a weekly field
laboratory. Prerequisites: NRE 281. Corequisites: NRE 375.
NRE 372 Forest Fire Ecology and Management – 2 credit hours. This course will describe the impacts of fire on various forested
ecosystems and describe tools for prediction of both the effects and behavior of forest fires. Fire prevention and
management techniques will also be discussed. Prerequisites: NRE 281, NRE 282.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 326 ~
NRE 375 Silviculture – 4 credit hours. A study of ecosystem-based sustainable and adaptive forest management silvicultural
systems, regeneration methods and intermediate treatments. Prerequisites: NRE 281, NRE 282, NRE 379, NRE 380.
Corequisites: NRE 371.
NRE 376 Forest Pest Management – 3 credit hours. An introductory course on the biology, ecology and management of forest
pests, with particular emphasis on insects and tree disease pathogens. The course includes a weekly three-hour
laboratory, where students develop skills in insect and pathogen identification and learn to recognize pest problems via
associated host tree symptoms. Prerequisites: NRE 281, NRE 379.
NRE 379 Forest Ecology – 3 credit hours. An introductory course on the interaction between forest trees and their environment.
The course covers basic concepts and theories concerning forest structure, function and dynamics and their application
for sustainable forest management. Prerequisites: NRE 281, NRE 282.
NRE 381 Wood Products – 3 credit hours. A study of the physical and chemical composition of wood and the products derived
from wood. Prerequisites: NRE 281.
NRE 382 Forestry Field Techniques I – 3 credit hours. A forestry field technique course that covers timber harvesting, forest
mensuration and forest land surveying that is arranged to be taught during weekends, school breaks, or other arranged
times. Prerequisites or co-requisite: NRE 281.
NRE 383 Forestry Field Techniques II – 3 credit hours. A forestry field techniques course that covers forest management, forest
operations, Silviculture, urban forestry and forest recreation that is arranged to be taught during weekends, school breaks,
or other arranged times. Prerequisite or co-requisite: NRE 281.
NRE 384 Forest Operations Systems and Management – 3hrs. Valuation procedures, market forces harvesting and transportation
activities, and processing systems that supply human demands for forest products. Prerequisites: NRE 281, junior or
senior standing.
NRE 385 Forest Recreation – 3 credit hours. An introduction to forest recreation from the planning, policy, legal, and technical
standpoints. Campgrounds, picnic areas, trail construction, visitor, and operations management are a few of the major
areas covered. Specific information and recommendations on how to perform forest recreation jobs at the technical level
are also provided. Prerequisites: NRE 281 or sophomore standing.
NRE 386 Principles of Wildlife Management – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the life history requirements, behavioral
adaptations, habitat selection, population dynamics, community relationships, and management strategies of terrestrial
vertebrates in North America. History of wildlife management, current wildlife policies, and survey of wildlife field
techniques are also included. Prerequisites: BIO 101 or BIO 103.
NRE 387 Wildlife-Forestry Relationships – 3 credit hours. An in-depth course on the relationships between forest habitat
conditions and the abundance, diversity, and physiological condition of wildlife. Examination of wildlife effects on
forest regeneration and management practices with consideration of vertebrate pest control strategies. Discussion of
wildlife-habitat relationships models, habitat suitability models, and assessment of beneficial and detrimental impacts of
forest management on wildlife conservation. Prerequisites: NRE 281.
NRE 388 Principles of Fisheries Science – 3 credit hours. Hands-on introduction to fisheries science. Overview of the nature of
fisheries, brief introduction to the physiological ecology of aquatic organisms, methods in the capture and identification
of local fishes, introduction to trophic interactions, bioassessment, and habitat and water quality assessment. Prerequisite:
None.
NRE 389 Fisheries Management and Aquaculture – 3 credit hours. Hands-on introduction to the practice of fisheries management
and aquaculture. Overview of common and experimental aquaculture methods. Examination of basic fisheries
management techniques and experience in fisheries assessment. Prerequisite: None.
NRE 400 Fundamentals of Epidemiology – 3 credit hours. Students will learn the fundamentals of epidemiology. Areas of
emphasis include epidemiology definitions and practical applications, measures of morbidity and mortality, descriptive
epidemiology, observational and experimental study designs, data interpretation issues, infectious disease epidemiology,
environmental epidemiology, and chronic disease epidemiology. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE 101L.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 327 ~
NRE 401 Floral and Garden Center Management (formerly Nursery and Greenhouse Management) – 4 credit hours. Management
of garden centers, including financing, selecting a location, designing of facilities, greenhouse construction, selection of
plant materials, personnel management, selling and advertising, and maintaining plant materials. Principles and practices
of establishment and management of a retail flower shop, including store location, buying, floral design, pricing and
merchandise control. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
NRE 406 Soil Microbiology – 4 credit hours. A study of the properties and classes of microorganisms as related to soil and crop
production. Effects of microorganisms on the fertility, and chemical, and physical properties of soil, are emphasized.
Prerequisites: BIO 101, BIO 101L, BIO 102, BIO 102L, BIO 330, BIO 330L. Seniors and graduate students only.
NRE 410 Forage Management – 3 credit hours. A study of the soil - plant - animal complex as it relates to the morphology,
physiology, and utilization of forages. Emphasis will be on agronomic practices and physiological considerations in
forage management in Alabama. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or (BIO 204, BIO 204L)
NRE 411 Weed Science and Herbicide Technology – 3 credit hours. Phenology of weeds, habitat management by cultural,
mechanical, biological and chemical means, dissipation and phytotoxicity of herbicides. Application and physiological
relationships of herbicides and recent advances in weed control problems. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or BIO 204, BIO
204L.
NRE 417 Sustainable Crop Production – 3 credit hours. Principles of sustainable agriculture with modern crop production
practices, management of biological, physical, and human resources to optimize field crop production in a sustainable
and cost-effective manner. Emerging biotechnologies, precision agriculture, etc. are highlighted. Prerequisites: NRE 101.
NRE 421 Plant Propagation – 3 credit hours. A study of the principles, processes, methods, and materials involved in sexual and
asexual propagation of plants. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
NRE 422 Landscape Design and Construction – 4 credit hours. A study of the principles of landscape design, including symbols,
styles, finished drawings, selection and arrangement of plants, sections and elevations design of construction features and
computer-aided drawing. Prerequisites: NRE 423.
NRE 423 Ornamentals I – Trees and Shrubs – 3 credit hours. Type, characteristics, adaptation, maintenance, and functional uses of
ornamental plants used in landscape design, with a special emphasis on trees, shrubs, vines, and groundcovers.
Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
NRE 425 Lawn and Turf Management – 3 credit hours. Methods and principles of establishing and maintaining residential lawns
as well as special-purpose turf grasses for commercial landscapes, golf courses or athletic fields, including weed and pest
control. Prerequisites: NRE 101.
NRE 427 Ornamentals II – Flowers and Foliage Plants – 3 credit hours. Identification, culture, and use of herbaceous annuals and
perennials, bulbs, herbs and ornamental grasses. Flower bed and border preparation and maintenance; selection,
installation, and care of tropical foliage plants in interior settings; use of light, plant acclimatization, growing media,
fertilizers, containers, and pest control. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
NRE 428 Fruit and Vegetable Production – 3 credit hours. Commercial fruit and vegetable culture, including site selection and
preparation, classes of vegetables, species of fruits, establishment, pest control, and harvesting are emphasized in this
course. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or instructor consent.
NRE 430 Biostatistics – 3 credit hours. Introductory statistics, with emphasis on the biological sciences. Includes a study of natural
distribution systems, sampling techniques, data arrangement, tests of significance, and logical inferences. Prerequisites:
MTH 113.
NRE 431 Principles of Plant Breeding – 3 credit hours. Principles, methods, and techniques involved in plant breeding, and their
application to field crops. Prerequisites: BIO 204, BIO 204L, BIO 311, BIO 311L.
NRE 432 Plant Disease Diagnosis – 4 credit hours. A study of the general principles and methods applied in identification,
epidemiology, etiology, and control of major plant diseases Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 328 ~
NRE 433 Introduction to Molecular Genetics – 3 credit hours. The study of prokaryotic DNA structure and replication, restriction
analysis, sequencing, transcription, translation, gene regulation and gene expression. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
NRE 433L Introduction to Molecular Genetics Laboratory – 1 credit hour. This course emphasizes the basic techniques used in
molecular genetics and provides a step-by-step approach and hands-on experience in the field of recombinant DNA
technology. Corequisites: NRE 433.
NRE 435 Introduction to Bioinformatics – 4 credit hours. An interdisciplinary course melding information and biological sciences.
Structure and function of proteins and nucleic acids; retrieval and interpretation of bioinformation, algorithms and
software for sequence alignment, similarity searching of sequence databases. Prerequisites: General Biology/
Biochemistry, some familiarity with computer programming.
NRE 437 Plant Tissue Culture Methods & Applications – 4 credit hours.
NRE 440 Seed Production Practices – 4 credit hours. A study of the principles and practices in the production of pure seeds, with
emphasis on harvesting, drying and storage; crop and weed seed identification and laboratory practices in seed testing;
and official rules for testing seeds and seed laws or marketing. Prerequisites: NRE 101 or NRE 310.
NRE 441 Phytophysiology – 4 credit hours. A study of the environment-plant growth interaction in the physiology of plants with
emphasis on whole plant processes. Prerequisites: NRE 101.
NRE 445 Bioinformatics Applications – 3 credit hours. This course covers the translation and analysis of nucleic acid and protein
sequences, with an emphasis on the application of algorithms to biological problems. Discussions include applications to
genome and proteome sequences, protein structure, and sequence-structure analysis. Instructions, step by step tutorials
and links for each application are provided.
NRE 450 Earth Science – 3 credit hours. An advanced level overview of earth science concepts, processes, and categories, with
emphasis on plate tectonics, volcanism, weathering and erosion, global weather and climate, vegetation, and soil.
Emphasis on human interactions and relationships with the physical environment and resulting public policy and
management conflicts, (e.g., biodiversity as an issue) as well as management strategies are addressed. Prerequisites:
None.
NRE 451 Environmental Toxicology – 3 credit hours. Toxic effects of environmental chemicals on living systems, the chemical
and biological characteristics of major pollutants, their origins and uses, and the exposure, transformation and
elimination of toxic substances by biological systems. Prerequisites: (CHE 102, CHE 252) or instructor consent.
NRE 452 Soil Fertility and Fertilizers – 3 credit hours. A study of the relationship of soil chemistry, forms of nutrients in soils, and
role of plant nutrients in crop production, as well as other factors associated with soil productivity; and basic concepts of
fertilizer application and manufacturing. Prerequisites: CHE 102, NRE 251.
NRE 453 Hazardous Waste Management – 3 credit hours. The impact, technologies, problems and issues associated with
hazardous wastes, and management practices are emphasized in this course. Case studies of hazardous waste spills, risk
assessments, and remediation techniques are included. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 460 Soil Chemistry – 3 credit hours. Chemical and mineralogical composition of soil; fundamental chemical properties of
soils; nature and properties of soil colloids; cation exchange phenomena in soils; soil reaction, and soil acidity are
addressed in this course. Prerequisites: CHE 101, CHE l0lL, CHE 102, CHE 102L, NRE 251.
NRE 461 Soil Physics – 4 credit hours. A study of physical make-up and properties of soil, including structure, thermal
relationships, consistency, plasticity, water and their interrelatedness. Prerequisites: PHY 201, NRE 251.
NRE 465 Applications of Geostatistics – 3 credit hours. Use of geostatistical models in sampling experimental design, mapping
contaminant concentration, risk analysis, remediation, planning and probability analyses. Conceptual development of
theory and action in managing natural resources. Prerequisites: MTH 112, MTH 113, (NRE 430 or equivalent statistics).
NRE 470 Soil, Plant, and Water Analysis – 4 credit hours. Chemical and instrumental methods in the analysis of soil, plant, and
water samples; experimental and descriptive inorganic and organic analyses; atomic and molecular absorption and 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 329 ~
emission spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, X-ray diffraction and fluorescence, gas and ion chromatography, and ionselective electrodes. Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 202, NRE 251.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Environmental Science program. Therefore, students majoring in this
program cannot substitute this course.
NRE 471 Aerial Photo-Interpretation – 3 credit hours. Detection, identification and analysis of objects or features from aerial
photographs. Sensing devices and other equipment related to photogrammetry application are utilized. Interpretation of
terrain, vegetation, and cultural features is emphasized. Prerequisites: MTH 112, MTH 113.
NRE 472 Soil, Water and Air Pollution – 3 credit hours. The fate of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and other agricultural and
industrial pollutants in relation to environmental quality as well as the effects of these factors on checks and balances of
natural terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 102L, NRE 251.
NRE 474 Forest Ecological Management – 2 credit hours. A study of the integrated management of forest resources including
plant, site and landscape processes, as well as interrelationships of forestry practices, wildlife and range management,
hydrology, recreation, and other demands. Prerequisite: NRE 281, NRE 282, NRE 365, NRE 371, NRE 375, NRE 376,
NRE 379, NRE 380, NRE 387, NRE 430.
NRE 475 Principles of Wetlands – 3 credit hours. The importance of wetlands for wildlife, waste treatment, flood control, and
water quality is emphasized. Biological, chemical, and physical processes, which occur in natural and constructed
wetlands, are addressed. Field trips are required. Prerequisites: CHE 102, CHE 102L, NRE 251.
NRE 476 Remote Sensing of the Environment I – 4 credit hours. The principles of remote sensor systems and their utility, natural
resource inventory and management, land use planning, and environmental monitoring, as well as, interpretation of color
infrared photos, multispectral and thermal scanners, and radar imagery are emphasized in this course. Prerequisites:
instructor consent.
NRE 477 Insect Biology and Pest Management – 3 credit hours. Biology of insects, taxonomy, basic structure and function,
ecology and the management of insect pest populations. The course includes a weekly three-hour laboratory, where
students develop insect identification and collecting skills. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 478 GIS, Spatial Analysis, and Modeling – 4 credit hours. This intermediate Geographic Information Systems course
prepares students for advanced principles of GIS class. Principles and methods of spatial analysis and their application to
different disciplines such as urban planning, environmental science, and natural resource management. Integrate
geographic concepts and techniques used in spatial analysis, network analysis and 3D analysis with both raster and
vector data structures. Prerequisites: NRE 365.
NRE 480 Natural Resource Policy – 3 credit hours. Evaluation of land and forest problems and policies in the United States,
including an analysis of current social and resource characteristics that have shaped policy in the United States.
Prerequisites: NRE 281.
NRE 481 Hydrology and Watershed Management – 3 credit hours. This course addresses the occurrence and movement of water
over the earth’s surface. The hydrologic cycle, surface runoff relations, relationship of precipitation to stream flow with
frequency analysis, unit hydrograph theory, flood routing, probability in hydrology, hydrologic simulation and stochastic
methods in hydrology are covered. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
NRE 483 Forest Resources Economics – 3 credit hours. A discussion of the market, price, and cost affecting factors as they relate
to timber-harvesting techniques used for determining the best economic alternative. Seniors only. Prerequisites: NRE
281, ECO 232.
NRE 484 Ecological Processes – 3 credit hours. A review of ecological concepts and processes. Investigations into the ecological
role of fire and wetlands are also included. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 486 Environmental Policy and Law – 3 credit hours. An understanding of the environmental law system by examining
various laws, policies, and cases within the U.S. legal system that are used to minimize, prevent, or remedy the
consequences of actions which damage or threaten the environment, public health or safety. Prerequisites: None..
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 330 ~
NRE 488 Wildlife Techniques – 3 credit hours. Field and lab procedures for determining sex and age, capture and marking,
physiological indices, harvest surveys, population estimation procedures, and habitat evaluation. Includes mapping with
geographic information systems, orienteering and field safety. Introduce students to a broad range of methods and
equipment used by wildlife professionals to gather information on wild animals and their habitat. In addition, this course
will emphasize the characteristics of a particular technique that might make it superior to others in practical situations.
Prerequisites: None.
NRE 490 Special Problems – 1-3 credit hours. The student selects a problem within his or her major interest that is planned and
executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Prerequisites: instructor consent.
NRE 491 Seminar and Scientific Writing – 1 credit hour. A course designed to help students develop skills and techniques
associated with data gathering and presentation by using audio-visual equipment. Guest speakers will also present topics
of general interest in agriculture and environmental science. Prerequisites: Senior classification, instructor consent.
NRE 493 International Exchange and Study Abroad – 1-12 credit hours. Students entering into this program will register for 6-16
credit hours at the home institution and pay fees at the home institution, but actually take a load equivalent to the credit
hours for which they registered at one of the cooperating international institutions. Courses will be determined between
home institution advisor, student, and host institution mentor. Prerequisites: None.
NRE 494 Irrigation and Drainage Systems – 4 credit hours. Students will learn designing and construction of irrigation and
drainage structures. This course integrates soil and water physics; irrigation development; crop water requirements &
scheduling; irrigation planning and design; drainage criteria; design discharges; surface/sub-surface drainage systems
design; irrigation drainage structures; land grading and excavation; lab and field exercises and measurements.
Prerequisites: For NRES students – NRE 351. For Civil Engineering students – (EGC 305, CE 305) or instructor
consent.
NRE 495 Soil and Water Conservation Applications – 3 credit hours. Advanced theory and practice of soil and water conservation
engineering. Applications of soil and water conservation theory and practice. Design and construction of effective soil
and water conservation structures.
NRE 496 Environmental Health Internships – 3 credit hours. Those students enrolled in Environmental Health Science program
will gain additional field experience, career mentoring, and research opportunities through summer
employment/internships with partners such as state and local Departments of Public Health, Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS),
and biotech industries involved in biomedical research, etc. Prerequisites: Must have completed all course requirements
and instructor consent.
NRE 497 Forest Ecological Management Project – 4 credit hours. Capstone course with teams of students applying their
accumulated knowledge to identify, analyze, and solve real forest ecosystem management problems. Student teams
prepare a written management plan for a property, taking into account ecological economic, social, and legal constraints.
Senior standing and major in Forestry required. Prerequisite: Senior standing, NRE 281, NRE 282, NRE 365, NRE 371,
NRE 375, NRE 376, NRE 379, NRE 380, NRE 387, NRE 430, NRE 474, NRE 483.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Forestry program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
First Year Experience
ORI 101 First Year Experience – 1 credit hour. This course assists new students in making a satisfactory adjustment to the
collegiate environment. Topics include, but are not limited to, the history of AAMU, academic policies and procedures,
study skills, test-taking strategies, time management, coping with stress, career exploration, student life, financial aid,
money management, and The Freshman Academy exit requirements. Prerequisites: None.
ORI 101H First Year Experience Honors – 1 credit hour. This course assists new students in making a satisfactory adjustment to the
collegiate environment. Topics include, but are not limited to, the history of AAMU, academic policies and procedures,
study skills, test-taking strategies, time management, coping with stress, career exploration, student life, financial aid,
and other relevant information. Entering honors freshmen who enter AAMU with fewer than 30 credit hours are required
to register for this course. This course is mandatory for graduation. The payment of the enrollment fee is required. The
grade earned for this courses is used in calculating a student’s overall grade point average.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 331 ~
ORI 102 First Year Experience – 1 credit hour. A continuation of ORI 101.
ORI 102H First Year Experience Honors – 1 credit hour. This course assists new students in making a satisfactory adjustment to the
collegiate environment. Topics include, but are not limited to, service learning, character education, and
personal/professional development. Second semester honors freshmen are required to register for this course, as it is
mandatory for graduation. The grade earned for this courses is used in calculating a student’s overall grade point
average.
Physical Education
PED 102 Fitness for Life – 1 credit hour. A course acquainting all age groups with cardiovascular fitness, facts and fallacies
regarding exercise and health and a number of evaluation techniques as each of these relate to physical and total
conditioning. Candidates will develop and participate in personal fitness programs. Prerequisites: None.
PED 107 Gymnastics & Rhythms – 1 credit hour. A course designed to assist students with developing the skill necessary to teach
rhythmic activities/dance and gymnastics. Performance and safety will also be objectives. The students will learn to
organize materials and develop techniques that are essential to utilizing personal and general space. The student will
develop coordination, self-expression, creativity and endurance. Various concepts associated with basic locomotion and
non-locomotion movements are examined and experienced in detail. Prerequisites: None.
PED 110 Flag Football Weight Training – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to provide students with the basic principles,
rules, etiquette, terminology, skills, and playing strategies of flag football. In addition, students will be introduced to the
correct techniques and principles related to building personal fitness using weight training. Prerequisites: None.
PED 111 Tennis – 1 credit hour. Methods, procedures, techniques, and safety. Terminology, scoring, and skill development will be
included. Prerequisites: None.
PED 113 Badminton, Table Tennis, and Shuffleboard – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to teach the methods, procedures,
techniques, rules and applications of these sports. Prerequisites: None.
PED 114 Aerobics/Weight Training – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to introduce candidates to correct techniques and
principles related to building personal fitness using weight training. Candidates will also study the effects of aerobic
conditioning, techniques for measuring aerobic capacity, participate in aerobic activities, and design a personal aerobic
conditioning program. Prerequisites: None.
PED 122 Soccer – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to provide instruction in the fundamental skills, regulations, playing
strategies, safety procedures and care and selection of equipment for the sport of soccer.
PED 132 Beginning Swimming/Aquatics – 1 credit hour. Introduction beginning level swimming class. History, theory, and basic
stroke mechanics will be covered, on both lectures and skill instruction sessions. Prerequisites: None.
PED 133 Intermediate Swimming – 1 credit hour. This course is designed to both educate the student on the theories and
mechanics of swimming, while offering an emphasis in training. This course will be an introduction to swimming as a
lifetime fitness activity. History, theory, and basic stroke mechanics will be covered, on both lectures and skill
instruction sessions. Prerequisites: None.
PED 137 Golf – 1 credit hour. Basic principles, rules, history, etiquette, terminology, skill development, safety hints, playing
strategies and courtesies of the game. This course teaches students not only how to enjoy the game, but also how to use it
as a business tool as well. Prerequisites: None.
PED 202 Officiating – 2 credit hours. Introduction to the art and professional requirements of officiating intramural and athletic
contests. The traditional fall/spring sports of flag football, basketball, wrestling, volleyball, soccer, baseball, softball, Tball, track and field, and tennis are activities covered in this course. A weekly schedule for developing the necessary
skills required of each sport is included. Prerequisites: None.
PED 207 First Aid/CPR – 3 credit hours. The purpose of this course is to provide participants with the first aid knowledge and
skills necessary to help provide a safe environment for athletes, while they are participating in sports. In addition this
course will provide students with the knowledge and skills necessary to work as a first responder in an emergency 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 332 ~
situation, to help sustain life, reduce pain, and minimize the consequences of injury or sudden illness until professional
or medical help arrives.
PED 225 Individual Sports Skills – 3 credit hours. Focus on the skill development, organizational strategies, instructional
techniques and techniques for evaluating performance in a variety of individual, dual, and team sports. The activities
covered in track and field, handball, and aerobics and weight training. Prerequisites: None.
PED 226 Team Sports Skills – 3 credit hours. Focus on the skill development, organizational strategies, instructional techniques
and techniques for evaluating performance in a variety of individual, dual, and team sports. The activities covered in this
course are: volleyball, basketball, flag football, soccer, softball, pickle ball and field hockey. Prerequisites: None.
PED 250 Foundations of HPER – 2 credit hours. A course designed to assist students in developing a historical perspective of
events and developments prior to and after 1885 in physical education. The course includes the development of a
personal philosophy of education and physical education through analysis of aims, goals and principles. Prerequisites:
None.
PED 300 Teaching Activity Sports – 2 credit hours. This course is designed for the purpose of providing Physical Education
majors with an opportunity to increase their knowledge and understanding of basic sport skills. Emphasis will be given
to strategies for organizing, teaching and assessing student progress in each sport. Prerequisites: None.
PED 305 Methods and Materials in Elementary Physical Education – 3 credit hours. A course designed to prepare students to
teach physical education to children in grades K-6. It will use a developmental approach and stress exploratory methods
of teaching young children a variety of games, dance, gymnastics, and health-related fitness activities. Practicum
required. Prerequisites: PED 225, PED 226, admitted to Teacher Education.
PED 306 Materials and Methods in Secondary Physical Education – 3 credit hours. Development of skills necessary to teach
secondary school physical education. The student will learn to organize materials and develop teaching techniques that
are essential to the educational growth and development of each individual, through a guided program of physical
activities. Practicum required. Prerequisites: PED 107, PED 111, PED 137, PED 225, PED 226, admitted to Teacher
Education.
PED 308 Prevention and Care/Treatment of Sports Injuries – 2 credit hours. Fundamental concepts of kinesiology and physiology.
A practical approach to physical conditioning, weight training and the care of injuries common to athletic contestants and
physical activity participants are also included. As part of the course, the student will be involved in several planned
activities for treating specific simulated injuries. Prerequisites: BIO 101, BIO 101L.
PED 310 Advanced Strength and Conditioning – 3 credit hours. Health-related fitness assessments, weight training techniques,
plyometrics, aerobic training, nutrition, ergogenic aids, and flexibility training. Prerequisites: None.
PED 315 Teaching Activity Sports – 2 credit hours. This course is designed for the purpose of providing physical education
majors with an opportunity to increase their knowledge and understanding of basic sport skills. Emphasis will be given
to strategies for organizing, teaching and assessing student progress in each sport. Prerequisites: None.
PED 409 Exercise Physiology – 3 credit hours. A course is providing the student with a broad background regarding the
physiological effects of physical activity on the human body. The course also includes a laboratory component to ensure
a means for application and analysis by the student. Prerequisites: BIO 101, BIO 101L.
PED 412 Motor Behavior – 3 credit hours. A study of neuromuscular development, perceptual motor skill development, and motor
patterns which result in proficient movement in a variety of specific motor behaviors. The measurement, analysis, and
evaluation of motor behavior will also be emphasized. Prerequisites: None.
PED 420 Research in Physical Education – 3 credit hours. Designed to focus on key variables associated with the research process
in health and physical education. Students will develop their knowledge and skills by reading professional and scholarly
literature, and efficiently interpreting it. As a result students will become more knowledgeable consumers of relevant
literature in health, physical education, and the sport sciences. Prerequisites: None.
PED 422 Principles of Coaching/Intramurals – 3 credit hours. A comprehensive approach to organizing and administering an
intramural program. The course emphasizes the key elements of historical development, organizational structure, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 333 ~
budgeting, and tournament designed seasonal activities. Also included is an intense study of the specific aspects of
coaching as a person and as a professional, based on sound theories and practices pertaining to athletic performance,
athletic management, and relationships which are necessary for successful coaching. Prerequisites: None.
PED 427 Adapted Physical Education – 3 credit hours. An examination of the role of physical education in meeting the special
needs, interest and abilities of students with various physical, social, mental, and emotional differences. Also provided is
in-depth information regarding how to record medical histories, growth patterns, levels of motor learning, and designing
individualized physical education programs. Prerequisites: None.
PED 430 Exercise Testing and Prescription – 3 credit hours. Application of exercise testing and prescription in an array of
patient/client populations and development of proficiency in using testing equipment and evaluating results.
Prerequisites: None.
PED 445 Externship – 12 credit hours. An opportunity for students to participate in the complex dynamics of an educational
environment and at the same time prepare them for a multiplicity of careers in industrial recreation programs, and public
and private recreation-related programs, including Boy Scouts, Girls Scouts, fitness centers, handicap centers, hospitals,
YMCA’s, YWCA’s and other similarly related agencies. Prerequisites: None.
PED 450 Sport Management – 3 credit hours. An overview of the fundamental principles of sport management programs
combining theory and practice related to legal and ethical issues, marketing and organizational structure of recreational
and sport related services and facilities. Also, the course provides insights as to the principal avenues of sport
management careers, intercollegiate and professional sport, the sport and recreation industries, and the health and fitness
industries. Prerequisites: None.
PED 492 Professional Leadership in Physical Education – 3 credit hours. A course designed to help participants understand the
history and philosophy of physical education programs, teaching concepts, leadership training programs, safety
guidelines and resources needed as to the physical education profession. Prerequisites: None.
PED 494 Practicum Aquatics Administration/Exercise Science – 3 credit hours. This course is a supervised study and experience
with a cooperative agency, designed to provide an opportunity for students to participate in the complex dynamics of
educational theory and practice within their chosen fields of either aquatics administration or exercise science, while at
the same time preparing them for a multiplicity of careers in those industries. Placements include recreational programs,
and public and private recreation-related programs, fitness centers, handicap centers, hospitals, YMCA’s, and other
similarly related agencies. Prerequisites: None.
PED 495 Internship in Physical Education – 12 credit hours. One full semester of full-time teaching under the immediate direction
of supervising teachers in off-campus public schools. Upon return to the campus, students share their experiences,
discuss problems, and develop new techniques in a professional seminar. Prerequisites: Senior classification; official
admission to Teacher Education Program; minimum cumulative average of 2.75, “C” in all coursework completed, with
no grade less than a “C” for professional courses; completion of all coursework in the program. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Physical Education program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
Philosophy
PHL 201 Introduction to Philosophy – 3 credit hours. A study of the intellectual problems human beings face in their quest for
understanding of themselves and the world. Basic problems in metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, and logic are stressed.
Prerequisites: None.
PHL 203 Logic and Philosophy of Science – 3 credit hours. An introduction to deductive and inductive reasoning with special
reference to the nature of science. Prerequisites: None.
PHL 206 Ethics – 3 credit hours. A study of the nature of the good, moral obligation, and judgment, illustrated by reference to
contemporary social and political problems. Prerequisites: PHL 201.
PHL 301 History of Western Philosophy I – 3 credit hours. A survey of major philosophical concerns, with emphasis upon their
origin and subsequent development. The course is organized by cultural contexts and/or periods from the Pre-Socratics
through the Renaissance. Prerequisites: PHL 201.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 334 ~
PHL 302 History of Western Philosophy II – 3 credit hours. A survey of major philosophical concerns, with emphasis upon their
origin and subsequent development. The course is organized by cultural contexts and/or periods from 1600 through the
present. Prerequisites: PHL 201.
PHL 303 Applied Advanced Reasoning – 3 credit hours. This course uses texts from the philosophy of science to learn and apply
rules of syntax, semantics, logical implication and equivalence to analyze and construct arguments in scientific and other
academic languages. Scientific and academic writings will be analyzed for two purposes: to understand precisely the
writings’ content and claims, and to identify and critique the support offered for those claims. The course will seek to
teach students to use the rules of logic, syntax, and argument to address reasoning problems based on these academic
writings and to solve such problems in scientific and academic discourse and on standardized tests. Prerequisites: None.
PHL 304 Oriental Philosophy and Religion – 3 credit hours. A survey of concepts in Oriental philosophy, with emphasis upon
their origin and, where applicable, subsequent development. Prerequisites: None.
PHL 305 African Philosophy – 3 credit hours. A survey of the major concepts in African philosophy, with emphasis upon their
origin and, where applicable, subsequent development. Prerequisites: None.
PHL 401 Philosophy of Religion – 3 credit hours. A critical examination of fundamental religious problems: the nature and
existence of God, the relation between faith and reason, and the cognitive significance of religious language.
Prerequisites: PHL 201.
PHL 404 Aesthetics – 3 credit hours. A study of the expressiveness of objects and actions with reference to the theories of various
philosophers and artists concerning the nature of beauty and the criteria of art. Prerequisites: PHL 201.
Physics
PHY 101 Physical Science I – 3 credit hours. A course covering force, motion, gravitation, energy, energy in action, electricity and
magnetism, waves, the nucleus, and the atom. Prerequisites: MTH 011. Co-requisite: PHY 101 L.
PHY 101H Honors Physical Science I – 3 credit hours.
PHY 101L Physical Science Lab I – 1 credit hour. A laboratory course to accompany PHY 101, Survey of Physical Sciences I. This
hands-on experience illustrates basic principles of measurements, kinematics & dynamics of motion, fluids, heat and
thermodynamics, electricity and magnetism, optics, and matter. Prerequisites: None. Co-requisite: PHY 101.
PHY 102 Physical Science II – 3 credit hours. A course encompassing selected topics in the field of chemistry, geology,
meteorology, and astronomy. Topics to be covered include: the periodic law, crystals, ions, solutions, chemical reactions,
the atmosphere and hydrosphere, earth materials, the changing crust, earth and the sky, the solar system, the stars, and
the structure and evolution of the universe. Prerequisites: None. Co-requisite: PHY 102L.
PHY 102L Physical Science Lab II – 1 credit hour. The laboratory course to accompany PHY 102 Survey of Physical Sciences. This
hands-on experience illustrates basic principles of chemistry, geology, astronomy, and weather. Prerequisites: None. Corequisite: PHY 102.
PHY 201 General Physics with Trigonometry I – 4 credit hours. An algebra-based Physics course designed for majors in
agriculture, family and consumer sciences, food science, and environmental science. Its emphasis is on particle motion
with uniform acceleration, Newton’s Laws of motion, force, work, power and energy, mechanical energy, collision, laws
of conservation of energy, circular motion, angular velocity, angular momentum, centripetal force, Hook’s law, simple
harmonic motion, fluid statics, pressure, law of flotation, heat, concept of temperature and heat transfer, specific heat,
and gas laws. At least ten experiments will be performed in the laboratory. Prerequisites: MTH 112, MTH 113.
PHY 202 General Physics with Trigonometry II – 4 credit hours. The second part of an algebra-based physics course covering
static electricity, Coulomb’s law, potential, electrical field, Gauss’s law, current electricity, Ohm’s law, simple circuits,
Kirchoff’s law, heating effect, Joule’s law, magnetic effect, Ampere’s law, induction, magnetic properties of materials,
electrolysis, geometrical optics, reflection at plane and spherical boundaries, thin lenses, lens maker’s equation, optical
instruments, speed of light, and light as a wave. At least ten experiments will be performed in the laboratory.
Prerequisites: PHY 201.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 335 ~
PHY 213 General Physics with Calculus I – 4 credit hours. This is the first part of a calculus-based physics course designed for
sciences, engineering and technical majors. The goal is to acquaint students with the language, notation, and nature of
physics. The approach to the mathematical solution of physics problems is strongly emphasized throughout the course.
Topics to be covered will include mechanics, fluid heat, and thermodynamics. At least ten experiments will be performed
by the student. Prerequisites: None. Corequisites: MTH 125.
PHY 214 General Physics with Calculus II – 4 credit hours. The second part of a calculus–based physics course designed for
sciences, engineering and technical majors. The goal is the same as for Physics 1. Topics to be covered will include
electricity, magnetism, and light. At least ten experiments will be performed by the student. Prerequisites: PHY 213. Corequisite: MTH 126.
PHY 218 Modern Physics – 3 credit hours. A study of space and time, conservation laws, classical relativity, Galilean and Lorentz
Transformation, Michelson-Morley Experiment, relativistic mechanics, black-body radiation, photoelectric effect, xrays, Bragg’s Law and Compton effect, atomic structure, atomic spectra, Bohr model, hydrogen atom and singly ionized
helium atom, Stark effect, and Zeeman effect. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214.
PHY 220 Introduction to Astronomy – 3 credit hours. This course covers the history of astronomy and the development of
astronomical thought leading to the birth of modern astronomy and its most recent development. Emphasis is placed on
the coverage of astronomical instruments and measuring technologies, the solar system, the Milky Way galaxy,
important extra galactic objects and cosmology. Some of the topics covered include: gravitation, energy, gravity, light,
the solar system (planets, asteroids and comets), stars and galaxies. Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion, Newton’s Laws
of Motion, universal gravitation, principles of optics, telescopes; the Doppler effect, various objects in the solar system,
star formation, and stellar evolution, Milky Way and other galaxies. Prerequisites: MTH 101.
PHY 220L Introduction to Astronomy Lab – 1 credit hour (2 clock hours per week). This course covers the hands-on conceptual
learning of lenses, mirrors, telescopes, measuring distances using parallax, spectroscopy, stellar spectral types, Doppler
shift, expansion of the universe. Prerequisites: MTH 101.
PHY 252L Modern Physics Lab – 3 credit hours. An experimental course consisting of at least ten experiments selected from
advanced topics in physics. The purpose of this course is to provide general insight into advanced experimental
techniques involving refined electronic equipment and other sensitive apparatus. The experiments chosen each time the
course is offered will be announced in advance. Prerequisites: PHY 218.
PHY 303 (MTH 303) Methods of Mathematical Physics – 4 credit hours. A course consisting of three hours of lecture; topics
covered will include vector calculus, partial differential equations, boundary value problems, Fourier Series, Laplace
transforms, and Green’s function methods. The course is so oriented as to fulfill four-hour minor requirements in math or
physics. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214, MTH 125, MTH 126.
PHY 310 Scientific Computing and Visualization – 3 credit hours. This course is intended to familiarize students with the
computational tools used by professional scientists. We will use high-level tools such as matLab)Octave and
Mathematica. Topics covered will include Linear Algebra, Interpolation and Extrapolation, Integration, Differential
Equations, Matrix Algebra, Monte Carlo Methods, Computer Algebra, and Chaos. Prerequisites: CS 102, PHY 214.
PHY 321 Mechanics I – 3 credit hours. A course covering Galilean invariance, absolute and relative velocity, simple problems in
non-realistic dynamics, energy conservation, momentum conservation, rigid body dynamics, rotational and transitional
motion, Coriolis force, harmonic oscillator, force oscillations, combinations of harmonic oscillators, central force
problems, and gravitation. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214.
PHY 322 Mechanics II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of PHY 321. The course will generally start with general motion of a rigid
body and will include matrices for solving rigid body dynamics, inertia tensor, theory of vibrations, Lagrange’s
equations, generalized co-ordinates and dignorable co-ordinates, applications of Lagrange’s equations to simple systems,
Hamilton’s functions, Hamilton’s variational principle, Hamiltonian and Hamilton’s equations, Special Theory of
relativity, Einstein’s postulates, Lorentz transformation, length contraction and time dilation, and elementary relativistic
kinematics. Prerequisites: PHY 321.
PHY 331 Electricity and Magnetism I – 3 credit hours. An intermediate level course covering electric force (Coulomb’s Law),
electric field (Gauss’ Law), electrical potential (Poisson’s and Laplace’s equation and method of images), electric field in 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 336 ~
dielectrics, capacitors, electrostatic energy, and electric current (Ohm’s Law and Kirchoff Law). Prerequisites: PHY 213,
PHY 214.
PHY 332 Electricity and Magnetism II – 3 credit hours. The study of magnetic field (Biot’s and Savart’s Law, Ampere’s law),
Faraday’s Law of Induction, Inductance, and magnetic energy, AC circuits, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic
waves, and electrodynamics. Prerequisites: PHY 331.
PHY 333 Intro to Sensors and Applications – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on fundamentals, and basic physics behind
sensors and technologies that enable the detection of the presence of human, chemical, explosive, nuclear agents and
other applications. The objective is to empower the students with the basic knowledge of sensor science behind their
application and use in instruments and devices including to address threats. This course will be more extensive rather
than intensive. Prerequisites: PHY 213.
PHY 341 Heat and Thermodynamics – 3 credit hours. An intermediate course which deals with reversible heat processes
accompanying physical and chemical reactions involving gases, liquids, and solids. Topics include calorimetry,
thermometry, heat transfer and expansion, specific heat, laws of thermodynamics and applications, and introduction to
kinetic theory. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214.
PHY 350 Selected Supplementary Topics in Science – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to cover selected topics in science.
Specifically, the course will focus on biology, chemistry, and earth/space science supporting competencies for physics
and is designed for physics education majors. Supporting biology competencies covered in this class consist of
bioenergetics, organization of life, biomechanics, and cycles of matter. Supporting chemistry competencies covered in
the course consist of organization of matter and energy, electrochemistry, thermodynamics, and bonding. Supporting
earth science competencies covered in the course consist of structure of the universe, energy, and interactions of matter.
Further, this course will focus on implementation and utilization of science specific technology. Prerequisites:
Admission to EPP.
PHY 361 (BIO 361) Introduction to Astrobiology – 3 credit hours. Astrophysics is the scientific study of the origin, evolution,
proliferation and search for life in the universe, an interdisciplinary topic at the intersection of astronomy, physics,
biology, chemistry, atmospheric science, and other sciences. This course introduces the major fields of current research
in astrobiology: the requirements for life as we know it, the origin and evolution of life on Earth, the possibilities of life
elsewhere in the universe, and the search for extraterrestrial – microbial or intelligent – life. Prerequisites: MTH 125 and
(PHY 213 or CHE 101 or BIO 103).
PHY 401 Optics – 3 credit hours. A brief review of geometrical optics, physical optics, introduction to optics and spectroscopy.
Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214.
PHY 421 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics – 3 credit hours. This course covers Thomson’s electron diffraction experiment;
postulates of quantum mechanics; operator concept; expectation values; particle in a box; uncertainty principle;
Schrodinger equation and Eigen value problems: harmonic oscillator; square well potential; and elements of matrix
mechanics. Prerequisites: PHY 218, (PHY 303 or MTH 303).
PHY 431 Statistical Physics – 3 credit hours. A fundamental course to describe macroscopic systems from microscopic point of
view. Topics to be covered include characteristic features of macroscopic systems, concepts of probability, postulates of
the statistical theory, fundamental concepts of entropy, of absolute temperature, and of the canonical distribution;
relations between microscopic theory and macroscopic measurements; applications of statistical physics: equipartition
theorem of solids, Gibbs free energy, phase equilibrium, and kinetic theory of transport process. applications to diatomic
molecules, magnetization. Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214, PHY 341.
PHY 440 Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP) – 4 credit hours. Opportunity for undergraduates to participate
with AAMU Physics faculty and staff members in a wide variety of research activities and many interdisciplinary
laboratories and research centers. UROP will cultivate and support research partnerships between undergraduates and
AAMU faculty members. A written report and a presentation of research activities is required Prerequisites: PHY 213,
PHY 214.
PHY 441 Introduction to the Lower Atmosphere – 3 credit hours. The neutral atmosphere and its layers. Atmospheric composition.
Altitudinal variation of density. The hydrostatic equation and the perfect gas law. The scale height and geopotential
height. Kinetic theory and velocity distribution. Atmospheric water. Atmospheric electricity and lightning discharge. 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 337 ~
Rotation of the Earth and Coriolis force. Atmospheric motion and general circulation of the atmosphere. Weather and
climate. Solar radiation and the effects of the solar cycle on atmospheric parameters. Atmospheric trace gases and
anthropogenic effects. Atmospheric models. Prerequisites: PHY 213.
PHY 442 Introduction to Aeronomy – 3 credit hours. The neutral atmosphere and its layers. The hydrostatic equation and the
perfect gas law. Diffusive separation. Thermosphere and exosphere. Atmospheric drag and orbital decay of satellites.
Atmospheric models. Formation of the ionosphere by solar extreme ultraviolet radiation. The Chapman layer.
Morphology of the ionosphere. Ionospheric measurements. Ground based measurements and measurements using
rockets and satellites. Far ultraviolet remote sensing techniques. Transport processes in the ionosphere. Geomagnetic
control of the ionosphere. The "fountain effect" and equatorial anomaly. Solar flare effects on the ionosphere.
Prerequisites: PHY 213.
PHY 443 Introduction to the Solar System – 4 credit hours. Historical perspective. Bode's law. General description of the
members of the solar system: The sun, the planets, satellites, asteroids and comets. Detailed description of the physical
properties of the planets and planetary orbits. Terrestrial and Jovian planets. Planetary satellites. Origin of the moon.
Asteroids and comets. The sun and its stellar classification. Features of the Sun's surface. The sunspot cycle. The solar
wind. Filament eruptions and coronal mass ejections. Prerequisites: PHY 213.
PHY 444 Introduction to Orbital Mechanics – 4 credit hours. Historical perspective. Kepler's laws of planetary motion. Minimum
launch velocity to orbit, escape velocity and time to reach the moon. Low Earth orbit; Geo-synchronous orbit; Geostationary orbit; and Sun-synchronous orbit. The central force problem. The two-body problem and reduced mass.
Orbital maneuvers: In-plane and out-of-plane orbital changes. Perturbations of orbits. The orbital elements. Orbit
determination. The three-body problem and Lagrange libration points. Orbital decay due to atmospheric drag.
Prerequisites: PHY 321 or PHY 213.
PHY 445 Elements of Magnetospheric Physics – 3 credit hours. Formation of the magnetosphere by the interaction of solar wind
plasma with the Earth’s magnetic field. The structure of the magnetosphere: the inner and outer magnetospheres and the
magnetotail. Magnetosphere- ionosphere coupling and the generation of electric currents between the magnetosphere and
the ionosphere. Waves in the magnetospheric plasma and geomagnetic pulsations. Geomagnetic disturbances, auroras
and geomagnetic storms. Particle acceleration in the magnetosphere and radiation belt formation. The effects of
geomagnetic activity and radiation belts on humans, ground-based facilities and satellites. Diurnal, seasonal and solar
cycle variations of geomagnetic activity. Space weather and forecast of geomagnetic activity. The magnetospheres and
geomagnetic disturbances on other planes of the solar system. Prerequisites: PHY 331, PHY 332.
PHY 451 Introduction to Solid State Physics – 3 credit hours. A course including crystal structure, lattice dynamics, electron states
in periodic potential, semiconductor, magnetism, magnetic resonance, superconductivity, and point defects in solids.
Prerequisites: PHY 421.
PHY 453 Introduction to Nuclear Physics – 3 credit hours. A course including radioactivity; half-life, passage of radiation through
matter; isotopes; chart of nuclides; nucleus; mass charge; radii; alpha emission; beta decay theory; Fermi’s theory;
internal conversion; Electron capture; Deuteron problem; neutron; slowing down; chain reacting pile; and elementary
particles. Prerequisites: PHY 218, PHY 421.
PHY 455 Fundamentals of Nano-Technology – 3 credit hours. This is an interdisciplinary course dealing with applications of
nanotechnology to sciences and engineering. Topics include instrumentation in Nanotechnology like electron
microscopes, atomic force microscopes and molecular beam epitaxy; fabrication of nanopowders, carbon nanotubes,
nanomaterials and their applications to insulation materials, machine tools, batteries and medical implants; electrical and
mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes, nanobiosensors, photonic applications of nanotechnology including
nanolithography; nanoelectronics with nanofabrication using E- beam and UV lithography, single electron transistors,
new effects of nanoparticle coatings including application to solar cells; future applications including quantum
computing, nanorobots and nanomedicine.
PHY 460 Selected Topics in Physics – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide students an opportunity to study applied topics
that are not offered in other existing physics courses. When this course is offered, the particular topic to be studied will
be reflected in the course title. Prerequisites: PHY 213, PHY 214, PHY 201.
PHY 490 The Physics of Sports – 3 credit hours. The subject area covers many popular sports events in the Olympics including
Track and Field events and popular American ball games. Special topics include kinematics of sports projectiles; 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 338 ~
kinematics of the 100 m and 200 m dash; physics of the long jump, high jump, pole vault, triple jump, shot put, discus
and javelin. Physics of Basketball shooting, dribbling, passing and rebounding; baseball pitching and hitting and the fly
ball trajectory; throwing the football; athletic performance trends in the Olympics, and probability and statistics in sports.
Other topics may be covered depending on demand. Prerequisites: PHY 321 or (PHY 213 and a Mechanics course such
as ME 206 Dynamics) or instructor consent for special cases.
Political Science
PSC 201 Introduction to Political Science – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the discipline of political science. The course
provides an understanding of the basic foundations and fundamentals of the discipline and delineates the scope,
approaches, and concepts of political science. Included is a survey of major areas and aspects of the political process
ranging from political analysis to international relations. This course is a prerequisite for all other political science
courses. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 205 American Government – 3 credit hours. A study of the constitutional framework, its origin, nature, and organization. The
rights and duties of citizens of the United States and the administration and functions of the government as they affect
citizens and their institutions are emphasized. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 206 State and Local Government – 3 credit hours. A study of the institutions, structures, and functions of the American
political process from the perspective of states and local communities. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 265 (SOC 265/CRJ 265) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Introduction to basic and essential statistical concepts
introduced and their application to behavior measurements. Descriptive tools of central tendency, variability, and
standard scores are considered, as well as correlation and basic inferential tools of the t-test and simple analysis of
variance. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 307 Comparative Government – 3 credit hours. A study of the varied institutions through which people have attempted to
regulate their affairs. The major world governments are analyzed with considerable attention given to newly emerging
countries. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 309 Introduction to African Politics – 3 credit hours. An introductory analysis of African politics. This course covers the
traditional African political past and extends its impact to the contemporary period. The course focuses on major political
developments, ranging from colonialism to independence to the era of the military coup. Included are discussions of
major personalities as well as the diverse political-economic ideological variants that have emerged on the African
continent. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 310 African American Politics – 3 credit hours. A political history of Black Americans from reconstruction to the present.
Prerequisites: PSC 205.
PSC 312 Revolution in the Third World – 3 credit hours. A survey of revolutionary movements in selected Third World countries:
China, Vietnam, Mexico, Cuba, and three African nations. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 313 U.S. Foreign Policy – 3 credit hours. An examination of the formation and execution of American foreign policy since
World War II. In addition to an emphasis on the historical and institutional framework of foreign policy, the course also
focuses on some of the prominent issues/areas which occupy the present foreign policy agenda of the U.S. Prerequisites:
None.
PSC 314 Politics of the Middle East – 3 credit hours. A survey course of key Middle East countries, including Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Iraq, Jordan, United Arab Emirates, Egypt, and Israel. The course covers the historical background of the region,
as well as an up-to-date analysis of contemporary issues and problems. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 315 Urban Politics – 3 credit hours. An introductory inquiry into the politics of urban areas. While the primary focus is the
study and use of power and influence in American cities, emphasis is also given to identifying historical and
contemporary forces which have led to the development of the urban place as a primary form of spatial and political
organization. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 320 International Political Economy – 3 credit hours. To provide a critical understanding of the theories, institutions,
structures, and relationships found in international political economy and how they inform, shape, influence, or
determine the choices and actions of the relevant constituent actors. The course will therefore focus on theoretical 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 339 ~
frameworks, international production and trade, states and markets, North-South cooperation/divide, and global
problems. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 336 (CRJ 336/SOC 336) Black Lives Matter – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the nature, causes, development, forms, functions,
and outcomes of recent social movements are analyzed. Theories about social movements as a variation of collective
behavior are included.
PSC 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Political Science – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in
the form of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience
related to the student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development
Services (CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The
student’s faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to
receive ELO course credit. Prerequisites: PSC 201.
PSC 397 Program Seminar I – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 398 Program Seminar II – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions which address issues,
research, and concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 401 Western Political Thought – 3 credit hours. A survey of political thought contained in the western intellectual tradition.
By examining the major contributions and controversies generated by a select group of political philosophers, emphasis
is placed upon the idea that politics and government represent problematical exercises which require serious intellectual
reflection and inquiry. Prerequisites: PSC.
PSC 402 Seminar on American Politics – 3 credit hours. A survey analysis of contemporary problems and issues. The course first
treats the broad ideological and historical forces which have helped to shape the contemporary American political
setting. This is followed by an in-depth focus and discussion of the fundamental issues and problems of this era.
Prerequisites: PSC 201.
PSC 403 Constitutional Law – 3 credit hours. A focus on the decision-making process of the United States Supreme Court. The
course will include the analysis of major court cases through examination of the justices’ majority and minority opinions.
The cases and opinions will provide insight into the legal resolution of key social political and economic issues that
confront the nation. The course will also examine the operation of the federal court system with a specific focus on the
behind-the-scenes operation of the Supreme Court. Prerequisites: PSC 201.
PSC 404 American Political Thought – 3 credit hours. A survey of American political thought from America’s beginning as a
colony to the present. Among the themes to be addressed are the nature and evolution of liberalism, the fusion of
liberalism and capitalism, and the accommodation between democracy and liberalism-capitalism. Prerequisites: PSC
201.
PSC 408 International Relations – 3 credit hours. A critical analysis of the policies implemented by the major countries of the
world in their relationship with each other, from the eighteenth century to the present. Emphasis is placed on the causes
and consequences of war and on war as an instrument of national policy. Prerequisites: PSC 201.
PSC 415 Principles of Public Administration – 3 credit hours. A study of the basic concepts of public administration and the
administrative problems of organization, procedure, personnel, financial administration, administrative law, and public
relations. Prerequisites: PSC 201.
PSC 443 (CRJ 443/SOC 443) Social Research – 3 credit hours. An introduction to sociological research including the principles
of research design, and the collection, analysis, and reporting of data through actual field experience. Prerequisites:
None.
PSC 497 Program Seminar III – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions of issues, research and
concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
PSC 498 Program Seminar IV – 0.5 credit hour. Bi-weekly sessions involving presentations/discussions of issues, research and
concepts of interest to program majors. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 340 ~
Psychology
PSY 201 General Psychology – 3 credit hours. A survey course designed to introduce basic concepts, principles, and phenomena
in the science of behavior. Basic topics of psychological measurement, scientific methodology, human growth and
development, sensory systems, motivation, emotion, perception, learning, and behavioral deviancy are presented.
Prerequisites: None.
PSY 202 History and Systems of Psychology – 3 credit hours. A study of the historical origins of psychology and the development
and content of systematic philosophical and scientific bases. Primary schools of psychological thought are considered in
terms of content and contribution to contemporary psychology. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 211 Child Growth & Development – 3 credit hours. An introduction to child behavior and development from birth to old age.
Primary emphasis is placed upon development of learning, motor behavior, neutral growth, language, perception,
cognition, and socialization relative to both biological and environmental influences. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 265 (SOC 265) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Basic and essential statistical concepts are introduced and applied to
behavior measurements. Descriptive tools of central tendency, variability, and standard scores are considered, as well as
correlation and basic inferential tools of the t-test and simple analysis of variance. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 303 Applied Psychology – 3 credit hours. A survey course emphasizing the application of basic principles of behavior to life
situations. Of specific concern in such application is consideration of business, industry, advertising, public relations,
consumer, and educational situations. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 307 Introduction to Research – 3 credit hours. An introduction to basic concepts of scientific research methodology and
statistical analysis. Individualized research projects allow students to collect and analyze data using relevant
methodological and statistical concepts. Students will deal with general procedural problems and the writing of research
reports. Prerequisites: PSY 201, PSY 265.
PSY 320 Cognitive Psychology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the study of the relationship between mental processes. Major
topics discussed include information processing, perception, thought and memory.
PSY 325 Behavior Disorders in Children – 3 credit hours. A survey course of the major forms of childhood psychopathology,
methods of identification, and present methods of prevention and treatment.
PSY 330 (SOC 330) Social Psychology – 3 credit hours. A survey of group phenomena and the influence of groups on individual
behavior. Key topics reviewed will include the self, interpersonal communication, attitudes and aggression. The
dynamics of group behavior will also be explored. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 340 Principles of Learning – 3 credit hours. An empirical and theoretical study of the basic principles of conditioning and
phenomena of the learning process. Emphasis is placed on classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and
observational practices. Primary phenomena considered include acquisition, consolidation, transfer, extinction,
spontaneous recovery, and relearning. Supplementary consideration of theoretical accountability of basic phenomena
will be include. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 350 Conditioning of Behavior – 3 credit hours. This is an investigation of behavior control, manipulation, and modification.
PSY 360 Personality Theories – 3 credit hours. Focus on the major theories of personality in psychology. Emphasis is placed upon
the original theorists, as well as the development and application of each major theory.
PSY 365 Psychology and the Law – 3 credit hours. This course examines the legal system through the uses of psychological
concepts, methods, and finds.
PSY 402 Psychology of Adjustment – 3 credit hours. A survey course presenting human behavior as a constant adjustment to
internal and external conditions. Basic adjustive processes and responses are discussed with emphasis on reactions to
frustration and conflict. Defense mechanisms and behavioral abnormalities are also considered. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 403 (Formerly EDU 403) Educational Psychology – 3 credit hours. An analysis of the principles of classroom learning. The
major concepts, theories, and research of the acquisition of knowledge and interpersonal social skills are emphasized, 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 341 ~
with attention given to measurement and evaluation. Educational application of learning principles is stressed.
Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 404 Seminar in Psychology – 3 credit hours. A life-oriented consideration of problems and issues in contemporary
psychology. Discussion areas include graduate school opportunities, career opportunities, overviews of specific areas of
psychology, trends in research and applications, historical significant contributions to psychological knowledge, and
topics of student-specified interest. Required of majors and open only to juniors and seniors. Prerequisites: PSY 201 and
junior or senior standing.
PSY 405 Individual Study in Psychology – 3 credit hours. A course designed to encourage, facilitate, and guide individual
research in specific interest areas dictated by the advanced psychology student. A one-to-one student-faculty ratio is
provided to allow individual attention. Prerequisites: PSY 201, senior standing, instructor consent.
PSY 406 Industrial Psychology – 3 credit hours. A course emphasizing the role of human factors in the industrial world. It
addresses the problems of training personnel and improving working conditions. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 410 Helping Skills and Techniques – 3 credit hours. A fundamental course which teaches basic helping skills to students who
will be working with others in some "helping" capacity. Students learn how and when to apply listening and
communication skills, action skills, helping strategies, and intervention strategies.
PSY 415 Physiological Psychology – 3 credit hours. A functional analysis of the internal systems with process sensory input.
Specific attention will be given the CNS and PNS processing of information and the endocrine system as it influences
behavior. Topics include the composition and functions of neural systems and the relationship of motivation, emotions,
and personality to internal processes. Prerequisites: PSY 201. Co-requisite: PSY 415L.
PSY 415L Physiological Psychology Lab – 1 credit hour. Various laboratory exercises on the various topics covered. Prerequisites:
PSY 201. Co-requisite: PSY 415.
PSY 416 Experimental Psychology – 3 credit hours. An application of scientific methodology to investigation of basic behavioral
phenomena and principles. Controlled laboratory experiences are designed to illustrate the derivation, testing, and
evaluation of psychological knowledge. Empiricism is stressed in laboratory investigation of motor learning, verbal
learning, psychophysics, parapsychology, and individual differences. Various research designs and techniques are
considered. Prerequisites: PSY 201, PSY 307. Co-requisite: PSY 416L.
PSY 416L Experimental Psychology Lab – 1 credit hour. Laboratory investigation of verbal learning, psychophysics,
parapsychology, and individual differences. Prerequisites: PSY 201. Co-requisite: PSY 416.
PSY 421 Psychology Internship I – 3 credit hours. Field placement of advanced standing psychology majors. This course is
designed to provide supervised practical experience on a paraprofessional level in a clinical, education, or research
setting of relevance to psychology. Open only to senior majors with consent of advisor. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 422 Psychology Internship II – 3 credit hours. Same as PSY 421, but allowing additional hours credit. Prerequisites: PSY
201.
PSY 423 Adolescent Psychology – 3 credit hours. A study of the developmental changes between 12 and 19 years of age. Topics
include physical, mental, emotional, social, and moral aspects of development as well as factors that influence
development. Various technological orientations will be discussed and integrated. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 471 Abnormal Psychology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to deviant behavioral patterns. Primary attention is devoted to
etiology, dynamics, incidence, prognosis, and treatment of human psychopathology. The concept of normality is
considered in terms of social norms, socioeconomic, and group pressures. Conventional therapeutic measures are
discussed, as well as contemporary movement in mental health and outpatient treatment. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
PSY 482 Human Sexuality – 3 credit hours. An intense study of the physiological, psychological, sociological, and ethical
considerations of human sexuality. Prerequisites: PSY 201.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 342 ~
PSY 485 Psychological Testing – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to familiarize the students with the history of
psychological testing, the theory behind it and the various objective and projective instruments used to assess intellectual
and personality functioning.
Secondary Education
SED 307 Materials & Methods of Teaching in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours. A course designed to acquaint the student with
fundamental educational principles and practices in secondary schools and current acceptable methods, devices, and
techniques of learning that enhance and facilitate the teaching-learning process. The course also provides for supervised
practicum. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 409 Reading in the Content Area – 3 credit hours. A course focusing on the basic reading and study skills that students need,
regardless of the content area. It also provides concrete suggestions for ascertaining reading interests and activities of
secondary students. The course will be presented in a non-technical manner that stresses a practical approach.
Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 421 Materials and Methods of Teaching English in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours. An analysis of objectives of the high
school curriculum in English and a study of methods and practices effective in the teaching of language and literature.
Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 422 Materials and Methods of Teaching Mathematics in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours. A methods course designed for
persons interested in teaching mathematics in high schools. Emphasis will be given to the logic of arithmetic, algebra,
and geometry. The following topics are representative of the areas to be covered: mathematics as a study which
contributes to the realization of the general aims of education, the specific aims of mathematics teaching, the proper
place of mathematics in the secondary school curriculum, sources of materials and aids in the teaching of mathematics;
mathematics organizations (professional and student), mathematics literature (professional and lay), and tests in
mathematics. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 423 Materials and Methods of Teaching the Social Sciences in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours. A study of the aims and
function of the social sciences in the modern secondary school and the curriculum and methods appropriate to the
attainment of these objectives. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 424 Teaching Science in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours. An in-depth study of the current methods of teaching the
science disciplines (biology, chemistry, physics). During the course, candidates demonstrate understandings of the
central concepts, principles, theories, and laws of their science discipline, the interrelationships of science fields to
supporting disciplines, the central concepts of supporting disciplines, the role of science-specific technology, how
students develop and learn science, and how state and national standards impact the content knowledge necessary for
teaching 6-12 students. Candidates will also demonstrate the ability to plan multiple lessons, including inquiry-based
lessons, where emphasis is placed on 6-12 students collecting and interpreting scientific data in order to develop and
communicate concepts, understand scientific processes, relationships, and understand natural patterns from empirical
experiences. Candidates will plan and design learning environments that reflect the nature and social context of science,
using a variety of appropriate, inclusive, and motiving strategies, settings, and resources. Course material will focus on
various types of instruction and assessment strategies, including those that evaluate student preconceptions, confront and
address students’ naïve conceptions, and allow candidate to collect, analyze, and reflect on evidence to show that 6-12
students deeply understand scientific material, can distinguish science from non-science, understand the evolution and
practice of science as a human endeavor, and can analyze science assertions. This course will also focus on safety and
safety procedures, the ethical and humane treatment of living organisms in the science classroom, and the importance of
candidates participating in content-related and pedagogical-related professional development opportunities.
Prerequisites: Formal admission to the teacher education program.
SED 494 Pre-clinical Experiences in Secondary Schools – 3 credit hours (6 clock hour field experience per week). This
complementary field-focused course is taken with SED 424. The course provides candidates with additional
opportunities to examine the methods of teaching their specific science discipline (biology, chemistry, physics).
Candidates participate in weekly field experiences and attend weekly debriefing seminar sessions focused on fieldembedded assignments. During the course, candidates will demonstrate understandings of the central concepts,
principles, theories, and laws of their science discipline, the interrelationships of science fields to supporting disciplines,
the central concepts of supporting disciplines, the role of science-specific technology, how students develop and learn
science, and how state and national standards impact the content knowledge necessary for teaching 6-12 students.
Candidates will also demonstrate the ability to plan multiple lessons, including inquiry-based lessons, where emphasis is 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 343 ~
placed on 6-12 students collecting and interpreting scientific data in order to develop and communicate concepts,
understand scientific processes, relationships, and understand natural patterns from empirical experiences. Candidates
will plan and design learning environments that reflect the nature and social context of science, using a variety of
appropriate, inclusive, and motiving strategies, settings, and resources. Course material will focus on various types of
instruction and assessment strategies, including those that evaluate student preconceptions, confront and address naïve
conceptions, and allow candidate to collect, analyze, and reflect on evidence to show that 6-12 students deeply
understand scientific material, can distinguish science from non-science, understand the evolution and practice of science
as a human endeavor, and can analyze science assertions. This course will also focus on safety and safety procedures, the
ethical and humane treatment of living organisms in the science classroom, and the importance of candidates
participating in content-related and pedagogical-related professional development opportunities.
SED 495 Internship – 12 credit hours. This course entails one semester of full-time teaching under the immediate direction of
supervising teachers in off-campus public (or approved private) schools. Course participants meet National Science
Teacher Education Standards by demonstrating understanding of the following: the central concepts, principles, theories,
laws of science disciplines, the interrelationships of science fields to supporting disciplines, central concepts of
supporting disciplines, the role of science-specific technology, how students develop and learn science, and how state
and national standards impact the content knowledge necessary for teaching 6-12 students. Candidates demonstrate the
ability to plan and teach multiple lessons, including inquiry-based lessons, where emphasis is placed on 6-12 students
collecting and interpreting scientific data in order to develop and communicate concepts, understand scientific processes,
relationships, and natural patterns from empirical experiences. Candidates also demonstrate the ability to design learning
environments that reflect the nature and social context of science, and using a variety of appropriate, inclusive, and
motiving strategies, settings, and resources. Candidates’ abilities to develop and use various types of instruction and
assessments strategies, including those that evaluate student preconceptions, confront and address naïve conceptions, and
allow candidate to collect, analyze, and reflect on evidence to show that 6-12 students deeply understand scientific
material, can distinguish science from non-science, that students can understand the evolution and practice of science as
a human endeavor, and can analyze science assertions will be assessed in this course. Candidates will also be evaluated
on their abilities to create safe learning environments with important considerations made to the ethical and humane
treatment of living organisms in the science classroom, when appropriate. Weekly seminars on campus will allow
candidates to share their experiences, their participations in professional development opportunities, and work on statemandated assessment requirements in a professional manner. Prerequisites: Formal admission to the internship.
Sociology
SOC 201 Introduction to Sociology – 3 credit hours. A course providing an analysis of social interaction, the social process,
society, culture, social structures, and other concepts fundamental to sociological understanding. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 210 Social Problems – 3 credit hours. The setting of social problems and the analysis of the major problems of contemporary
America are considered. The conditions surrounding problems, theories about causation and amelioration are included.
Prerequisites: None.
SOC 212 Marriage and the Family – 3 credit hours. A consideration of the basic social institution in all its ramifications; the
processes of mate selection, socialization of children, adjustments inherent in marriage and family life and the impact of
social change from the vantage of the professional sociologist. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 253 (CRJ 253) Deviant Behavior – 3 credit hours. A study of processes by which some members of society become deviant.
Readings will deal with particular forms of deviance such as mental illness, suicides, prostitution, use of drugs, riots,
vice, and white collar crime in an effort to arrive at a general theory of the causes of deviance. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 265 (PSY 265/PSC 265/CRJ 265) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Introduction to basic and essential statistical
concepts introduced and their application to behavior measurements. Descriptive tools of central tendency, variability,
and standard scores are considered, as well as correlation and basic inferential tools of the t-test and simple analysis of
variance. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 310 Social Change and Collective Behavior – 3 credit hours. A course involving an analysis of the linkage between science
and technology by focusing on collective behavior as the consequences of the interplay between abstract principles and
practical application. Social change is treated as inherent in the characteristics of social systems (i.e., social organization
and social behavior aspects of human experience) such that the various collective activities are ordered in some sequence
of a cyclical pattern of recurrence. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 344 ~
SOC 323 (CRJ 323) Juvenile Justice – 3 credit hours. An examination of the nature and causes of juvenile delinquency. The course
also reviews the juvenile justice system and programs for treatment, control and prevention of juvenile delinquency.
Prerequisites: None.
SOC 325 Rural Sociology – 3 credit hours. Sociological analysis of rural life with emphasis on the rural-urban dichotomy, the
effects of personality, and the urbanization of rural society. This is a junior-level course. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 326 Urban Sociology – 3 credit hours. A course providing an analysis of urban concepts and the impact of urbanization on
social relations, social institutions, and the national interest. This is a junior-level course. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 327 Medical Sociology – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to introduce students to the field of medical sociology. The
course will address, and understand, a range of concepts, theories and contemporary issues relating to health and illness.
SOC 328 Social Organization – 3 credit hours. A course dealing with the major trends in political, economic, and social values and
perspectives of the emerging American scene considered in relation to changes in the distribution of power, technology,
and character development in terms of small groups and complex organization. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 330 (PSY 330) Social Psychology – 3 credit hours. Central focus upon the relationships that prevail between groups and
individuals. Social influence, social attraction, and the interplay of cultural, social, and psychological factors in
becoming a personality are included. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 332 Educational Sociology – 3 credit hours. Socialization in the educational institution, and upon the structure (status and
roles), interactional patterns, and culture of the school. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 334 Cultural Anthropology – 3 credit hours. A consideration of the different ways man copes with his natural setting and
social milieu; different bodies of customs, variations in the socialization process, and the transmission of the culture
heritage. Primitive societies are the major ones considered. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 336 (CRJ 336/PSC 336) Black Lives Matter – 3 credit hours. Analysis of the nature, causes, development, forms, functions,
and outcome of recent social movements are analyzed. Theories about social movements as a variation of collective
behavior are included. Prerequisites: SOC 351.
SOC 351 (CRJ 351) Criminology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the field of criminology. Specifically, the course will cover
the nature of crime, the causes of criminal behavior and the reactions to crime. Theories of crime causation will also be
discussed. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 390 Experiential Learning Opportunity (ELO) in Sociology – 3 credit hours. An experiential learning opportunity in the form
of a co-op, internship, or field experience that combines classroom concepts with practical work experience related to the
student’s major field of study. A student must be at least a sophomore, registered with Career Development Services
(CDS) and possess/maintain a minimum 2.0 GPA in cumulative and major to register for this course. The student’s
faculty advisor, department chair, and dean must sign-off on an ELO prior to and after completion in order to receive
ELO course credit. Prerequisites: SOC 201.
SOC 432 (CRJ 432) Minorities, Crime and Social Policy – 3 credit hours. Treatment of the various minority groups in America,
their relations with the dominant group, their subordination, and problems arising from minority status. Prerequisites:
None.
SOC 434 Social Stratification – 3 credit hours. A study of social inequalities and differentiation as related to social structures and
social systems, analysis of patterns of interaction within and between social classes and the implications of stratification
of human group behavior. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 441 Sociological Theory – 3 credit hours. An examination of the classical and contemporary theoretical models in sociology
and investigations of the development of sociological thought. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 443 (PSC 443/CRJ 443) Social Research – 3 credit hours. An introduction to sociological research including the principles of
research design, and the collection, analysis, and reporting of data through actual field experience. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 345 ~
SOC 445 Population Problems – 3 credit hours. An introduction to demography and population research. The course includes
population theory, trends and rates in natural increase, population composition, distribution, planning, and human
ecology. Prerequisites: None.
SOC 448 (CRJ 448) Social Legislation for Crime and Social Policy – 3 credit hours. A survey of the development, philosophy, and
changes in American social legislation and of its impact upon contemporary life. The last 30 years are stressed.
Prerequisites: None.
SOC 450 Senior Seminar – 3 credit hours. A concluding course focused upon sociological concepts, theories, contributors,
literature, and methods. This should be the terminal major course. Prerequisites: SOC 201.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Sociology program. Therefore, students majoring in this program cannot
substitute this course.
Spanish
SPA 101 Elementary Spanish I – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamentals of oral-aural and reading-writing in the
language. Grammatical structure, conversational form, and various aspects of Spanish culture are important parts of the
course. Students learn to use the spoken language and work on pronunciation. Prerequisites: None.
SPA 102 Elementary Spanish II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of SPA 101. The basic language skills (speaking, reading,
writing, and listening) introduced in SPA 101, along with Spanish culture, will be emphasized to complete the
introductory level. Prerequisites: SPA 101.
SPA 201 Intermediate Spanish I – 3 credit hours. A continuation of the first-year course. Students continue to improve their
proficiencies in oral-aural and reading-writing skills. They must demonstrate increased linguistic proficiency and
humanistic understanding of the Spanish people through reading historical or cultural texts in Spanish. Prerequisites:
SPA 102.
SPA 202 Intermediate Spanish II – 3 credit hours. A continuation of SPA 201. Students continue to demonstrate intensive reading
knowledge of texts dealing with Spanish literature and culture, with emphasis on speaking and writing short Spanish
compositions. Vocabulary expansion is also emphasized. Prerequisites: SPA 201.
SPA 301 Methods and Materials of Teaching Spanish – 3 credit hours. This course will acquaint students with principles of
language acquisition and trends in foreign language education. It will also explore the methods and strategies of teaching
Spanish at the secondary level. Topics examined include instructional strategies related to the teaching of Spanish,
innovation, teaching resources, curriculum development, lesson and unit planning, and classroom practice and
management. Prerequisites: SPA 102.
SPA 303 Conversational Spanish – 3 credit hours. In this course, in-class discussions and oral presentations will provide students
with the opportunity to practice intermediate-level conversational Spanish. The subject matter covered in the course will
relate to Spanish culture, current events, and our ports of call. There will also be a limited focus on writing skills in
Spanish through the development of a voyage-long journal. Prerequisites: SPA 202.
SPA 305 Introduction to Latin American Literature – 3 credit hours. At an intermediate-high level, this course will introduce
students to literary concepts and literature from Latin America. Students also experience intensive work in conversation
and composition. Class is conducted entirely in Spanish. Prerequisites: SPA 202.
SPA 308 Latin American History & Culture Through Cinema – 3 credit hours. Students will view films from a range of Latin
American countries (including Argentina, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and Guatemala), read essays and articles that
complement these films' themes, and raise important questions about Latin American identities and the socio-political
tensions that characterize the region. Instruction will be in English; films will be in Spanish with English subtitles.
SPA 402 Studies in Iberian Peninsula Literature – 3 credit hours. At an intermediate-high level, this course will examine texts and
literary movements from the literature of Spain, both classical and modern. Class is conducted entirely in Spanish.
Prerequisites: SPA 202.
Special Education
SPE 201 Introduction to the Study of Exceptional Children – 3 credit hours. An overview of the various exceptionalities and an
introduction to basic special education services and procedures. Practicum is required. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 346 ~
SPE 205 Language Development – 3 credit hours. A course emphasizing the study of normal language development with
emphasis on the development of the phonological, syntactic, and semantic systems in children. This course will
emphasize the use of assistive technologies in language instruction. Field experience required. Prerequisites: Admission
to EPP.
SPE 209 Introduction to Early Childhood Special Education (ECSE) – 3 credit hours. A course covering the rationale for ECSE
and providing a comprehensive overview of major principles and practices relating to the provision of services to young
children with disabilities. Procedures for screening, diagnosis, and educational assessment are included.
Transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary team processes are emphasized throughout the course. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 303 Assessment of Children K-6 – 3 credit hours. Development of the essential skills required to diagnose skills deficits and
to plan and implement educational strategies to remediate deficits experienced by exceptional learners. This course also
incorporates strategies for using assistive technology to diagnose and remediate exceptional learners. Practical
experiences using assessment techniques will be stressed. This course also addresses the management and manipulation
of the physical environment to ensure an appropriate setting for assessment. Field experience required. Prerequisites:
SPE 201 and Admission to EPP.
SPE 304 Parent and Family Assessment – 3 credit hours. A course designed to inform entry-level teacher candidates methods in
family assessment and evaluation as well as methods in parent counseling and support are included. Techniques and
programs of parent training and education are important aspects of this course. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 306 Methods and Materials in ECSE – 3 credit hours. A course designed to give beginning teachers requisite skills in
designing, developing, implementing, and evaluating methods and materials to be used with preschool children with
disabilities. Practicum required. Prerequisites: SPE 209.
SPE 309 Adaptive Techniques and Methods in ECSE – 3 credit hours. A study of techniques which are necessary to adapt early
childhood education curricula to the specialized needs of the birth to five-year old with disabilities. Course content
includes the development of skills in the areas of technological adaptations, working with aides and volunteers,
transdisciplinary teaming, behavior management techniques, task analysis, and concept analysis. Practicum required.
Prerequisites: SPE 209.
SPE 319 Transitioning Planning for Students with Special Needs – 3 credit hours. A course covering the historical development of
lifespan planning, model programs for the handicapped, techniques for developing and implementing a program and
instructional strategies. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 326 Management of Classroom Behavior – 3 credit hours. A study of the application and skills in the use of behavior
management skills, including direct observations, behavioral interventions, analysis, and subsequent program
modification based upon analysis. This course also addresses the management and manipulation of the physical
environment to ensure the safety of the learner and teacher as well as appropriate body mechanics to facilitate academic
achievement. Prerequisites: Admission to EPP.
SPE 327 Assessment in Early Childhood Special Education – 3 credit hours. Emphasis upon the basic knowledge and skills that
are prerequisites to analyzing, selecting, and implementing effective assessment practices with children from birth
through age eight with disabilities. Prerequisites: FED 200, SPE 201.
SPE 328 Learning Strategies – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide teachers of students with mild disabilities with current
strategies for assessing student learning styles and modifying instructional methods for optimal learning. Prerequisites:
None.
SPE 329 Materials and Methods of Learning Strategies for Students with Exceptionalities – 3 credit hours. This course provides
an overview of methodologies used in teaching learners with exceptionalities from early childhood on, with an emphasis
on students with disabilities, intellectual disabilities, and emotional behavioral disorders. Students explore the
relationship between individual student characteristics and the development of the individualized education program,
instructional implications of special education categories, characteristics of various service delivery models, task
analysis, unit and lesson plan development, instructional strategies, classroom organizations and management, behavior
management, crisis prevention, and transition planning/career counseling. Communication through consultation and 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 347 ~
collaboration and professional/ethical practices are also considered. Practicum required. Prerequisites: Admission to
Educator Preparation Program.
SPE 401 Corrective Reading – 3 credit hours. Several approaches to the teaching of reading to slow learning children are covered.
Students will prepare and implement individual reading plans, develop teacher-made materials, and select and purchase
reading materials. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 403 IEP/IFSP Writing – 3 credit hours. A course designed to inform entry-level teachers of children with disabilities with the
legal requirements, the procedures, and the techniques used for developing legally correct individualized education
programs (IEPs) and individualized family service plans (IFSPs) as required by the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act of 1997 (IDEA). Prerequisites: None.
SPE 405 Methods and Materials of Teaching Children in Grades K-6 with Disabilities – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to
give beginning teachers requisite skills in designing, developing, implementing, and evaluating methods and materials to
be used with young children with disabilities in grades K-6.
SPE 410 Counseling with Parents of Exceptional Children – 3 credit hours. Discussion and application of the rationale for positive
communication and interaction with parents and techniques of facilitation. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 426 Collaborative Consultation – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide prospective teachers (ECSE, Collaborative K6 and Collaborative 1-6) knowledge and skills required to successfully facilitate intervention strategies with regular
classroom teachers and other support personnel in meeting the needs of students with disabilities. This course also serves
as a professional elective for prospective teachers of pre-elementary, elementary, and secondary students.
SPE 430 Materials and Methods of Content-Area Instruction – 3 credit hours. A course designed to give beginning teachers
requisite skills in designing, developing, implementing and evaluating methods and materials of content area instruction
for children and adolescents with disabilities in grades 6-12.
SPE 431 Behavior Management for Secondary Teachers – 3 credit hours. A study of the application and skills in the use of
behavior management skills, including direct observations, behavioral interventions, analysis, and subsequent program
modification based upon analysis. Prerequisites: None.
SPE 432 Materials and Methods of Functional Curricula – 3 credit hours. A course designed to give beginning teachers requisite
skills in designing, developing, implementing and evaluating methods and materials of functional curricula for children
and adolescents with disabilities in grades 6-12.
SPE 435 Learning Strategies for Adolescents (Grades K-6) – 3 credit hours. A course designed to provide teachers of children and
adolescents with disabilities with current strategies for assessing student learning styles and modifying instructional
methods for optimal learning.
SPE 436 Assessment of Secondary Students – 3 credit hours. Development of the essential skills required to diagnose skills
deficits, and to plan and implement educational strategies to remediate deficits experienced by exceptional learners.
Practical experiences using assessment techniques will be stressed. Prerequisites: SPE 201.
SPE 495 Internship in Special Education – 12 credit hours. A course consisting of twelve weeks of full-time teaching under direct
supervision of certified experienced teachers in Special Education classes in off-campus public schools. Weekly
meetings are held on campus with university supervisors. Prerequisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program.
Sport Management
SPM 200 Introduction to Sport Management – 3 credit hours. This course is an overview of the fundamental principles of sport
management programs. It combines theory and practice related to legal and ethical issues, marketing and organizational
structure of recreational and sport related services and facilities. I also focuses on principle avenues of sport management
careers, intercollegiate and professional sport, the sport and recreation industries, and the health and fitness industries..
Prerequisites: None.
SPM 300 Sport Ethics – 3 credit hours. The purpose of this course is to confront the many issues in our society within the context
of the sports world and promote the critical examination of ethical issues and moral dilemmas inherent in sport. 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 348 ~
Emphasis will be the development of personal philosophies, clarifying values and refining moral reasoning skills relative
to sports. Prerequisites: None.
SPM 314 Sport Facilities & Event Management – 3 credit hours. This course will address the principles and procedure involved in
sport facility and event management. Emphasis will be given to planning sport facilities and events. Emphasis will be
given to planning new sport facilities and events, operation of facilities and attracting events, and event planning,
production and evaluation. Prerequisites: None.
SPM 326 Sociology of Sport in Modern Society – 3 credit hours. This is an introductory course devoted to the examination of
sport and its relationship to society and social institutions. Emphasis will be given to the effect of social phenomenon on
sport participation and behavior and how the dynamic nature and diverse parameters of society affect the sport industry.
Primary emphasis will be given to sport in American society. Prerequisites: None
SPM 403 Legal Aspects of PE & Sport – 3 credit hours. Course Description. This course is intended to aid Health, Physical
Education, Recreation, and Sport Management professionals in understanding major legal issues affecting the practices
and procedures followed in their professions. Emphasis will be given to procedures for initiating an active program of
risk and liability management that will help ensure the safety of participants in these programs. Prerequisites: None
SPM 423 Sport Psychology 3 credit hours. This course will examine traditional psychological theories as applied to the dynamics
of group and individual interaction in sport. Various theories of motivation and techniques in group leadership will also
be examined. Prerequisites: None.
SPM 425 Contemporary Issues in Sport Management – 3 credit hours. This course will introduce the student to the various issues
facing sport and sport administrators on a daily basis in the contemporary world including drug abuse and gratuitous
violence which have grown out of modern sport activities. Prerequisites: None
SPM 440 Advanced Sport Management – 3 credit hours. This course will take a how-to approach to sport management since
research has shown that knowledge is more likely to be implemented when it is acquired from learning by doing rather
than simply learning from reading, listening or thinking. This approach will impart the important principles, concepts,
research, and theories of management. This will enable the student to develop the ability to apply sport management
principles to sport organizations and further develop management skills in their personal and professional lives.
Prerequisites: None.
SPM 445 Externship – 12 credit hours. This course is designed to give students an opportunity to participate in the complex
dynamics of an educational environment while simultaneously preparing them for a multiplicity of careers in sport
management. Externship settings include collegiate athletic departments, intramural departments, professional sport
teams, professional sport leagues, private and public sector organizations, entrepreneurial endeavors, and many more.
Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Sport Management program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
Statistics
ST 324 (MTH 324) Elementary Statistics – 3 credit hours. Descriptive statistics, basic probability (set, counting rule,
permutation, combination, calculating probabilities, conditional probabilities and Bayes rule), random variable, discrete
and continuous probability distributions (binomial, Poisson, hyper-geometric and normal), point and interval estimation,
hypothesis testing, correlation and regression, goodness-of-fit, analysis of variance, and contingency tables. It also
includes computer-assisted data analysis with emphasis on the interpretation of results generated by software packages
such as SAS, SPSS, STATPAK and others. Prerequisites: MTH 112 with MinGrade of C.
ST 327 (MTH 327) Applied Regression Analysis – 3 credit hours. A study of least squares; simple, polynomial and multiple
linear regression including residual and lack-of-fit analysis; simple multiple, partial, and multiple-partial correlation;
analysis of covariance; model building algorithms, analysis of variance, and computer-assisted data analysis.
Prerequisites: ST 324 or MTH 324.
ST 344 (MTH 344) Design and Analysis of Experiments I – 3 credit hours. A study of the fundamental concepts and basic
principles of design, construction and analysis of experimental designs. Designs to be included are completely
randomized complete block, Latin square, Greco-Latin square, split-plot, multiple comparison, and factorial.
Prerequisites: ST 327 or MTH 327.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 349 ~
ST 355 (MTH 355) Applied Statistics – 3 credit hours. Collection and presentation of data; measures of central tendency and
variability; skewness, binomial, normal, Chi-square, t-and F-distributions; estimation; confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing; correlation coefficient; and analysis of variance. This course includes laboratory activities. This
course is designed for majors in biology, zoology, botany, medical technology, pre-veterinary medicine, and pre-nursing.
This course is not open to mathematics majors or applied statistics minors. Prerequisites: MTH 112.
ST 444 (MTH 444) Applied Time Series Analysis – 3 credit hours. Fundamentals concepts; classical regression models as
forecasting models, exponential smoothings, stationary and nonstationary models, additive and multiplicative
decompositions, moving average, autoregressive, model identification, forecasting techniques, seasonal model
identification, model building and forecasting with ARMA and ARIMA processes, estimation in MA, AR, ARMA and
ARIMA processes. Box-Jenkins methodology, computer aided modeling, applications. Prerequisites: (MTH 324 or ST
324) with MinGrade of C.
ST 453 (MTH 453) Probability and Statistics – 3 credit hours. Probability axioms, methods of enumeration; conditional
probability, independence, empirical frequency distribution, discrete and continuous random variables, expectation,
moment generating functions, joint distributions, sums of random variables, and limit theorems. Prerequisites: MTH 126
or MTH 146.
ST 473 (MTH 473) Statistics – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the theory of statistics. Topics include sampling distributions,
estimation, hypothesis testing, linear models, analysis of variance, nonparametric and distribution-free procedures.
Prerequisites: ST 453 or MTH 453.
Social Work
SWK 202 Introduction to Social Welfare and Social Work – 3 credit hours. A practice course designed to introduce students to the
profession of social welfare, social work and human services. A historical review of social work and social welfare will
be discussed with implication for the future of the discipline in connection to the social welfare systems. It traces the
origin and development of the social work profession through helping systems; defines and illustrates the problems of
social functioning; describes social work services in various settings, outlines the course requirements as mandated by
the Council of Social Work Education and introduces the ten competency areas that govern practice behavior as an entry
level social worker. The generalist problem-advising approach is introduced in this course. Students will learn problemsolving generalist helping methodologies for the development of practice skills. Prerequisites: None.
SWK 205 Gerontology – Aging and Problems of the Aged – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to give students an overview of
the unique problems faced by the elderly in our society. Students are made aware of the societal attitudes toward the
aged. Biological factors, psychological problems, health, retirement, housing, personal and social aspects of death and
other areas of concern are presented. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301.
Note: This course cannot be used to satisfy General Education requirements in Areas I-IV.
SWK 301 Human Behavior and Social Environment I – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to provide Social Work students
with basic knowledge to understand individuals, groups, collective interactions, and behavior in terms of their biological,
psychological, and social bases. Prerequisites: SWK 202.
SWK 302 Human Behavior and Social Environment II – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to extend the knowledge base
introduced in Human Behavior I. Emphasis is placed on behaviors that are significant to professionals in human services.
Critical incidents are utilized to analyze behaviors of selected individuals, groups, and communities. Prerequisites: SWK
202, SWK 301.
SWK 303 Poverty and Deprivation – 3 credit hours. This course describes the causes of poverty and its relationship to other social
problems. A historical perspective is offered to help students understand the impact of the Great Depression in changing
the values of the American people toward people in need. Programs that combat poverty are discussed and critiqued.
Causes of poverty and populations impacted are explored. Prerequisites: SWK 200, SWK 201, SWK 301, SWK 309,
[(SWK 205) or (SWK 311, SWK 302, SWK 304)].
SWK 304 Diverse Populations – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to sensitize students to accept differences among people
and their experiences. Emphasis is placed on the differences among cultural groups and how differences are perceived
through a majority cultural context and the impact on achieving success. Students explore the relationship of their own
personal values and those of the profession. Personal stereotypes that limit their perceptions of client strengths are 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 350 ~
identified and confronted. As a result, students become better prepared to provide competent service to a diverse client
population. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301.
SWK 305 Rural Human Services – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to provide content for understanding service delivery to
at-risk rural populations. The uniqueness of rural lifestyles and problems are explored. This course also deals with
cultural issues and values that are unique to rural life and how these variables impact need and functioning of rural
people. The special repertoire of skills, knowledge, attitudes, and values that are necessary for practice with rural
populations are included. Differences between rural and urban roles-sets of clients as well as the differences and
similarities between the role-sets of the urban and rural social work practitioner are examined. Prerequisites: SWK 202,
SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK 304, SWK 312, (SWK 205 or SWK 311).
SWK 308 Understanding the Black Experience – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to use films as a means to understand the
black past as it relates to the contemporary condition of blacks in our society. The course affords students an opportunity
to examine black people as presented in film. As a result, students acquire a perspective of what the black presence has
been, is, and how it may become in the future. Upon completion of this course, students have an in-depth look at the
impact of culture and environment as they affect behavior and personality. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK
302, SWK 304, SWK 312, SWK 305, SWK 313, (SWK 205 or SWK 311).
SWK 311 Introduction to Child Welfare – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to identify analyze and assess child welfare
programs, policies, and services for understanding the needs and services available for children. Vulnerable children
(physically and sexually abused, neglected, special needs, in new families) are discussed to increase student
understanding of their plight and the need for effective interventions, prevention and policy strategies. Understanding
human diversities and the social environment in rural and urban communities are examined in this class. Current child
welfare issues are studied for a basic understanding of economic conditions, social justice and cultural factors.
Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301.
SWK 312 (Formerly SWK 309) Social Work Methods I (Individuals & Families) – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to help
students develop beginning generalist social work practice skills. Self-assessment, ethics and values of the social work
profession, roles, competencies, the generalist problem-solving process, effective interviewing, recording, and evaluative
skills are included. This course also focuses on the social work relationship including the influences of race, ethnicity,
class, culture, gender, sexual orientations and varying diversities, in delivering effective services to individuals and
families. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301.
SWK 313 Social Work Methods II (Groups) – 3 credit hours. This course has been designed to prepare students for generalist
practice with groups utilizing systems and ecological theoretical frameworks. The historical development for the use of
groups will be explored as an understanding for how group work has become a significant component of generalist
practice. Application of the problem-solving model (e.g., engagement, assessment, planning, implementation,
evaluation, termination and follow up) in working with groups, stages of group development, interviewing techniques,
and group dynamics will be addressed as critical components of working with groups. Values (e.g. empowerment), ethics
and diversity required for generalist social work practice will be discussed as a major component of the group process.
Research methodology in assessing problems and evaluating change will be highlighted. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK
301, SWK 302, SWK 312, SWK 304, (SWK 205 or SWK 311).
SWK 314 Formerly SWK 310) Social Work Methods III (Organizations and Communities) – 3 credit hours. This course is
designed to prepare students for beginning generalist practice. It is designed to help students understand organizations
and communities and how to use social work processes to improve the functioning, services, and situations for
populations in rural and urban communities. The content includes a problem-solving model used in interventions with,
organizations and communities. Practice skills (relationship building, assertiveness) and empowerment strategies to help
diverse, oppressed, vulnerable and discriminated populations, groups, organizations and communities are developed.
Generalist skills for activating resources are emphasized. The use of research methodology in assessing problems and
evaluating change is also emphasized. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312,
SWK 313, (SWK 205 or SWK 311)..
SWK 315 Substance Abuse: The Impact of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to identify,
analyze and assess programs, policies and services for the needs of children who have been diagnosed with fetal alcohol
syndrome or other related prenatal exposure to alcohol that is characterized as fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. The
development of skills, knowledge and attitudes of person performing specific tasks surrounding the needs of the
vulnerable population will be enhanced. A historical, biomedical and clinical background of fetal alcohol syndrome 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 351 ~
(FAS) and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs) will be explained as a means for understanding the dynamics of this
preventable disease. In addition, students will gather insight to increase their understanding of the need to develop and
identify effective interventions, prevention and policy strategies. The significance of understanding human diversities
within the context of the social environment in rural and urban communities are examined in this class as it applies to
prevention of alcohol-exposed pregnancies in women of childbearing age. Additionally, resource identification and
development will serve as key components for collective service provision. Ethical, legal, and policy issues are examined
surrounding child welfare and human rights, specific to self-determination versus duty to protect in respect to at-risk
populations, economic conditions, social justice and cultural factors. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302,
SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312, SWK 313, (SWK 205 or SWK 311).
SWK 403 Social Welfare Policies and Services – 3 credit hours. This course is designed to utilize research to interpret legislation
and policies as a means of improving, changing and developing required services in recognition of problems and issues
inherent in the social system; provide knowledge and skills regarding social policy, research, social legislation, policy
formulation and analysis for enhancing delivery of social services; and rurality for insuring sequential, measurable
learning. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312, SWK 313, (SWK 205 or
SWK 311).
SWK 410 Social Work Research Methods – 3 credit hours. This course is the first of two research courses. It is designed to present
the basic principles of social science research (scientific method). It covers all aspects of the research process from
problem formulation to writing of the research proposal. It introduces students to qualitative, quantitative, and single
subject methods of conducting research. Ethical issues associated with conducting research are addressed. The use of
research to inform practice, policy, and to promote social justice are explored. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK
302, SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312, SWK 313, (SWK 205 or SWK 311).
SWK 414 (Formerly SWK 407) Field Instruction – 8 credit hours. Field Instruction is a planned experience in which the student is
assigned to a social service agency for a minimum of five hundred hours per semester. This experience provides the
opportunity for the student to work with individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities. The student is
able to test out those skills and theories taught in the classroom. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK
304, SWK 305, SWK 312, SWK 313, SWK 314, SWK 403, SWK 410, (SWK 205 or SWK 311), (SWK 308 or SWK
315).
SWK 414L (Formerly SWK 407L) Field Instruction Seminar – 3 credit hours. A three-hour seminar is held each week. The seminar
permits field instruction students in different field settings to share and benefit from their numerous and varied learning
experiences. The seminar is also held to evaluate, discuss, and interpret the student's involvement in the field. Discussion
in class will provide an opportunity for increased knowledge, assessment of values, and development of skills.
Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312, SWK 313, SWK 314, SWK 403, SWK
410, (SWK 205 or SWK 311), (SWK 308 or SWK 315).
SWK 415 Senior Seminar in Research – 2 credit hours. This course is the second research course. In this course, students carry out
the research design developed in SWK 410 Research Methods course. They administer the instrument, collect and
analyze data, interpret results and discuss implications. Students continue to examine previous research and to analyze
how past research designs and evaluations have dismissed, diminished, or reinforced negative stereotypes and prejudices
in oppressed and at-risk populations. Prerequisites: SWK 202, SWK 301, SWK 302, SWK 304, SWK 305, SWK 312,
SWK 313, SWK 314, SWK 403, SWK 410, (SWK 205 or SWK 311), (SWK 308 or SWK 315). Corequisites: SWK
414L, SWK 414.
Technology Basic Course
TBC 102 Microcomputer Skills for Technology – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the personal computer as a tool for
engineering technology. This course covers computer terminology, Microsoft WindowsTM, word processing for technical
reports, and spreadsheet programs as a management and scientific tool. Prerequisites: None.
TBC 201 Technical Communications – 3 credit hours. Aspects of communication that the technical person is likely to encounter in
industry. The course emphasizes techniques for clear, concise expression of thoughts in written and oral communication.
The basic principles and procedures for organizing technical reports, letters, and presentations are explained. The student
will learn how to communicate ideas in writing clearly and efficiently. Students will learn how to plan a writing task,
prepare technical correspondence, write informal and formal reports, use graphic aids in reports, make oral presentations,
and use presentation software. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 352 ~
Technology General Course
TGC 202 Applied C++ for Engineering Techniques – 3 credit hours.
Technical Education
TTE 199 New Teacher Institute – 3 credit hours. An introductory course for first-time career and technical education teachers. The
course provides continuing instruction for first-time teachers who have attended the Alabama State Department of
Education one-week (40 clock hours) course for all new teachers. New teachers attend a one-week general topics course
at a central location for the start of the school year. Bi-weekly seminars are held to provide follow-up and expansion of
the topics included in the one-week seminar. The bi-weekly seminar focuses on effective teaching in career and technical
education with emphasis on classroom management, discipline, classroom instruction, teaching methods, and course
development and evaluation. Prerequisites: Completion of the New Teacher Institute is required to enroll in this course.
TTE 298 Occupational Assessment: Skills – 9 credit hours. An approved occupational competency test is administered to students
to assess their skills in a career/technical education program area (trades and industry). Prerequisites: Minimum validated
wage earning work experience in an approved postsecondary career/technical education program (trades and industry).
Students must make arrangements with the professional organizations administering the examination, and provide copies
of the test results to the Department.
TTE 299 Basic Career/Technical Education Program Completion Credits. – 0-36 credit hours. Credits awarded to students at the
point of entry for work related learning in post-secondary career/technical programs offered at community/technical
college level; military occupational specialty (MOS) career programs; career development programs in business and
industry; and civilian career programs sponsored through government schools and colleges through an approved
evaluation program guide.
TTE 300 Planning and Organizing Technology Education Programs – 3 credit hours. A study of the equipment, materials, tools,
and curriculum found in a typical Technology Education Program at the middle school and high school levels.
Prerequisites: None.
TTE 301 Principles of Technical Education – 3 credit hours. This course is designed for the beginning technical education teacher,
as well as those planning to enter the profession. It focuses on methods and practical examples of methods and
techniques needed by teachers to deal with the bureaucracy, the curriculum, and students during the first year of
teaching. Prerequisites: Completion of the New Teacher Institute is required to enroll in this course.
TTE 302 Course Development and Evaluation in Career/Technical Education – 3 credit hours. The course focuses on practices,
procedures, and techniques that are employed to analyze occupations to identify for content for the program of study;
organization and sequence of instruction; and developing of objectives and learning outcomes; and implementation
schedules. Prerequisites: Hold or eligible to hold the Level I Career/Technical Certificate endorsed in Technical
Education or the Level 1/Level 2 Career/Technical Certificate endorsed in Health Science. Hold or is eligible to receive
the Level 1 Career/Technical Certificate endorsed in Technical Education.
TTE 305 Learning Resources and Technology in Career/Technical Education – 3 credit hours. A study of principles and methods
essential to the development and use of technology in career or technical education program. Prerequisites: Level 1
Career/Technical Certificate.
TTE 402 Methods of Teaching Technical Education – 3 credit hours. The course covers practices, procedures, and techniques that
are employed in developing and selecting learning resources and technology to be used in teaching subjects in a
career/technical education program. Prerequisites: TTE 302.
TTE 403 Career Information and Guidance – 3 credit hours. The course covers research and development in theories of vocational
development and occupational choices; and models of career education programs. Prerequisites: Senior standing.
TTE 404 Classroom and Laboratory Management in Career/Technical Education – 3 credit hours. The course emphasizes the
physical aspects of buildings, laboratories, and shops to include building design and lay. The course also covers topics on
purchase and inventory of supplies, materials, and equipment; selection, acquisition, installation, and maintenance of
equipment; and basic philosophy of classroom and laboratory instruction, and industrial safety. Prerequisites: TTE 302.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 353 ~
TTE 405 Functions of the Technical Education Coordinator – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the role and responsibilities of
the high school cooperative technical education coordinator. It examines in details planning, organizing, and maintaining
a high school cooperative career/technical education program; and designing and providing instruction in the related
instruction program. Prerequisites: Admission to the Secondary Teacher Education Program.
TTE 406 Methods of Teaching in Career and Technical Education –3 credit hours. The course examines methods and materials of
presenting classroom and laboratory instruction in career/technical education programs. Candidate teachers are required
to design and develop lessons to be used in providing instruction and evaluating students’ performance in specialized
technical education (trades and industrial education) programs. Prerequisites: TTE 302, TTE 402, TTE 404.
TTE 407 Career/Technical Student Organizations – 3 credit hours. This course examines the duties and responsibilities of
career/technical education teach in advising students in the high school career/technical student organization.
Prerequisites: Senior standing.
TTE 440 Special Needs in Career/Technical Education – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on methods and materials appropriate
for providing instruction in a career/technical education programs for students special needs and students from special
populations. Prerequisites: TTE 406.
TTE 450 Practicum – 3 credit hours. Supervised practical experience provided to the candidate teacher in a career/technical
education program at the secondary or post-secondary level. Prerequisites: Senior standing and security clearance
required to enroll in this course.
Technical Education
TYE 495 Internship in Technical Education – 12 credit hours. A 12-week, full-time internship experience in a high school setting
under the direct supervision of the master teacher. Candidate teachers meet weekly during the evening hours on campus
in a seminar arrangement to discuss problems and successes encountered during the internship experience. Candidate are
required to prepare a portfolio, outlining in detail, their daily activities and experiences during the internship.
Prerequisites: Candidate teachers must be cleared by the Office of Field Experience to enroll in Internship.
Urban Planning
UPL 101 Introduction to Urban Planning – 3 credit hours. A general introduction to the physical, social, economic, and political
aspects of the fields of urban planning and the expertise planners contribute toward guiding the growth and development
of communities. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 103 The Community and You – 3 credit hours. An examination of the role of citizens in the life and viability of communities
which explores the concepts of community, leadership, and public service obligations. Emphasis is placed on an
understanding of the dynamics that converge to create healthy and civil societies. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 201 Small Town Planning – 3 credit hours. An examination of the features which distinguish the rural environment from the
urban and, a review of rural development principles. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 203 History and Theory of Planning – 3 credit hours. This course presents the foundations of planning history and theory in
the United States through a survey of classic and contemporary writings. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 216 Planning Research Methods I. – 3 credit hours. This basic course in statistics is intended to give the student a
comprehensive understanding of the meaning and purpose of statistics and its application in planning and urban analysis
and to use computer software in data organization, grouping and analysis. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 310 Urban Economics Analysis – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the economic analysis of urban areas and its
application to urban and regional planning. Its main emphasis considers economic functions that promote growth and
development of urban centers. These include the process of urbanization, industrial and urban locations, urban economic
base, central place functions and functional classification, land price and urban land use structure, municipal revenues
and expenditures, fiscal policies and services. Prerequisites: ECO 231, ECO 232.
UPL 316 Planning Research Methods II – 3 credit hours. This course covers the process of studying in order to know or discover
factual information on some phenomenon or situation. It focuses on the basic steps of an empirical investigation
including problem formulation, methods of data collection, treatment and analysis of data, and how to draw correct
inferences/conclusions in the interpretation of findings. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 354 ~
UPL 317 Graphic and Site Design Workshop – 3 credit hours. This course introduces the basic techniques for planning and
designing a parcel of land. Also, students are introduced to graphic and urban design principles and techniques It
includes graphic communication site and land use analysis and preparation of site and subdivision. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 327 Land Use Planning – 3 credit hours. The preparation of the land use plan element of a city’s comprehensive plan,
including the allocation of land for various uses based upon a community’s goals and objectives. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 330 Demographic Analysis – 3 credit hours. A study of the demographic characteristics of the human population that
currently exists in an area and the projections of future growth trends for planning purposes. Also, it exposes students to
the tools used in population analysis including use of population forecasting rates and ratios. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 404 Social Equity in Planning – 3 credit hours. This course equips students with competencies for identifying and
understanding current issues related to social justice and equity governance and how the public policy process can be
formulated to better promote the equitable distribution of public goods and services. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 405 Practicum I – 3 credit hours. Student placement in a public or private planning agency or department to perform a
predetermined work assignment under direct agency supervision of ten hours per week. Prerequisites: Junior or senior
standing with a cumulative GPA of 2.5 or above.
UPL 406 Practicum II – 6 credit hours. Student placement in a public or private planning agency or department to perform a
predetermined work assignment under direct agency supervision for 20 hours per week. Additionally, a special project
will be completed by the student for evaluation by the agency and faculty supervisors. Prerequisites: Junior or senior
standing with a cumulative GPA of 2.5 or above.
UPL 407 Legal Basis of Planning – 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the legislative and the legal basis for planning and the
process, procedures, and laws for guiding urban development review systems, and planning law. The course provides an
understanding of how law and urban policy intersect and underpin the process by which planners solve urban problems.
Prerequisites: None.
UPL 408 Comprehensive Planning Workshop – 3 credit hours. A hands-on course focusing on techniques and procedures of planmaking for urban and regional (city, city/country, country a multi-county) areas. The workshop includes the preparation
of background studies, community goals statements, planning analysis, plan documents, and planning implementation
strategies. The planning process is presented from the perspective of state-level model planning enabling legislation and
existing state guidelines that influence the planning practice at local and area-wide levels. Prerequisites: UPL 327, 330.
UPL 409 Seminar on Planning Problems – 3 credit hours. An examination of public policies and programs which affect the
physical growth and development of a city with emphasis upon local land use, housing, and transportation “problemsolving.” Prerequisites: None.
UPL 410 Seminar on Social Policy Planning – 3 credit hours. An examination of critical social policy issues and feasible
alternative solutions. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 420 Senior Project – 3 credit hours. An investigation of a selected urban issue or problem. Executed under the direction of an
assigned faculty member, a paper or a report will be prepared and presented which reflects the student’s analytical
research and problem-solving capabilities. Prerequisites: None.
Note: This course is a capstone course for the Urban Planning program. Therefore, students majoring in this program
cannot substitute this course.
UPL 429 Professional Practice – 3 credit hours. The objective of this course is to introduce students to professional methods of
managing planning projects and agencies and to train students in the ethics of professional practice. It provides practical
skills in project planning, proposal writing, budget development, and program management for governmental and nonprofit agencies. Additionally, the course introduces concepts of professional practice and the basic requirements for
American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) membership. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 435 Transportation Planning – 3 credit hours. An introduction to methods, processes, and techniques for planning a total
transportation system. Prerequisites: None.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS, AAMU Undergraduate Bulletin, 2019-2020 ~ 355 ~
UPL 436 Health Planning – 3 credit hours. An examination of the problems of community health care and the use of planning
principles applied toward the provisions of comprehensive health services and facilities. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 438 Transportation Modeling – 3 credit hours. This course presents an in-depth orientation to contemporary transportation,
planning computer model packages, and analytical techniques. Students are introduced to calibration and application of
network-based aggregate data for travel demand models. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 442 Planning and the Environment – 3 credit hours. A course designed to explore relations within the natural environment
that influenced the conduct of urban planning. In the process, contemporary physical, social, economic, cultural, and
regulator aspects of the environmental planning are presented with an emphasis on sustaining a healthy environment for
future generations while accommodating change. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 443 Housing Issues – 3 credit hours. An introduction to the nature of housing needs and supply in the community. It also
examines the various methods (policies and programs) used by the public sector to intervene in the housing market. In
addition, the methodology and techniques utilized to assess housing conditions and needs are examined. Prerequisites:
None.
UPL 444 Historic Preservation and Neighborhood Conservation – 3 credit hours. A study of the legislation, standards, and
practices related to the conservation of neighborhoods and historically significant buildings and districts. Prerequisites:
None.
UPL 445 Environmental Assessment – 3 credit hours. Introduces the student to a concentration of federal, state, and local
environmental regulations that translate public policy into environmental assessment and mitigation. The course first
presents the history of environmental regulatory process with emphasis on environmental, social and economic
principles that influence contemporary environmental policy. Having established a theoretical framework, the
relationship between different levels of regulation is explored and how it leads to reporting and addressing identifiable
environmental and socio-economic impacts. Various compliance issues are also considered. In the process, students
apply their knowledge of implementing environmental policy to real world environmental project review and problemsolving. Prerequisites: None.
UPL 453 Community Development Process – 3 credit hours. The course teaches basic community development concepts and train
students in ways residents can work together to improve their community. The course consists of reading assignments
and practical exercises designed to introduce basic concepts, theories, and strategies. Students prepare and present papers
and conduct practical exercises to gain an understanding of community assets and their use as community development
tools. Prerequisites: None.