ALP 101 General Mathematics 4 CR
This course is a review of the fundamental operations of
basic mathematics including multiplication, division,
fractions, decimals, percentage, ratio, and an introduction
to the fundamentals of algebra. This is a preparatory
course and does not count as degree credit.
Placement criterion: Accuplacer score
ALP 104 Adult Basic Education 0 CR
This course offers an open laboratory for GED/HSED test
preparation: skills assessment, tutoring in reading, science,
social studies, math and writing, and career counseling.
ALP 107 General Computing 2 CR
This class allows the beginning student to gain experience
using Microsoft Word as well as become familiar with
searching the Internet, sending e-mails and practicing file
management. This is a preparatory course and does not
count as degree credit.
ALP 108 Basic English 3 CR
This course is a review of basic grammar and writing
skills. The composing process of sentences and
paragraphs, essays in standard American written
English is emphasized. This is a preparatory course and
does not count as degree credit. Placement criterion:
Accuplacer score
ART 101 Basic Drawing 3 CR
Students learn the basic drawing techniques of line,
composition, value, space, and perspective. Students
use a variety of media to learn to draw from direct
observation. Group critiques take place, so students
can provide constructive criticism about each other’s
drawings.
ART 102 Basic Design & Color Theory 3 CR
This course examines the basic elements and principles
of design, including balance, emphasis, proportion and
rhythm. Students are introduced to visual theories and
exercises that guide the student through the design
elements of line, space, texture and color. Students
complete a series of projects that relate to advertising
layout and design and visual merchandising.
ART 103 Introduction to Painting 3 CR
This course is designed for students with little or no
painting experience. Students learn how to use acrylic
paint in a variety of techniques. Specific exercises teach
students the fundamentals of observation, composition,
color, tone, and texture. Group critiques take place, so
students can provide constructive criticism about each
other’s paintings.
ART 107 Native Art-Traditional Techniques 3 CR
This course will explore traditional techniques of making a
variety of utilitarian and symbolic art forms of Ojibwe
people. The historical and cultural background of the
projects will be examined. Topics may include hide
tanning, birch bark basketry, finger weaving, and feather
work. Students will gain an appreciation of the wide
variety of techniques through hands- on experience.
This course satisfies the General Education requirement
for three credits of an Aesthetic Experience elective.
ART 114 Beading I 3 CR
This introductory course explores traditional and
contemporary methods of beading. Students learn about
materials, traditional Ojibwe patterns, and basic beading
techniques.
ART 115 Beading II 3 CR
A continuation of ART 114, this course teaches students
more advanced beading skills such as peyote stitch, daisy
chain, and applique. Prerequisite: ART 114 or instructor
approval
ART 116 Finger Weaving 3 CR
This course introduces one aspect of the threedimensional Native art of weaving in the Great Lakes
region: finger weaving or the weaving of yarn bands or
sashes. This course focuses on weaving sashes for use as
a belt, a headband, an armband, a leg band, or a shoulder
strap. It explores traditional and contemporary
expressions of the historical and cultural factors as
reflected in the weaving of sashes. Traditional applications
using the four basic designs in the making of a woodland
sash are explained and demonstrated: the diagonal, the
chevron, the lightning, and the arrowhead.
ART 117 Introduction to Native American Art History 3 CR
This course presents a geographic overview of the visual
arts of First Nation Americans in their historical and contemporary contexts. The class will focus on art making
practices from select North American across the continent
with a focus on Woodlands Art as well as Modern and
Contemporary expressions including architecture, pottery,
sculpture, textiles, painting, and performance. It will also
address the effects of new economies, marketplaces,
materials, technologies, and Euro American patronage on
Native American art. The course will include still images
and documentary film.
ART 118 Yarn Bag Weaving 3CR
This course introduces the three-dimensional Native art
of weaving in the Great Lakes region, with a focus on yarn
bags. This course explores traditional and contemporary 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 52
expressions of the historical and cultural factors as
reflected in the weaving of yarn bags. The course begins
with setting up the two-stick loom. The weft and warp of
traditional weavings with larger looms are compared to
the two-stick method. The techniques of making an
Ojibwe woven yarn bag, often called a twined bag, are
explored as well as the more contemporary construction
of yarn bags with synthetic fibers.
ART 122 Art Capstone 3 CR
The Art Certificate Capstone is an opportunity for art students to demonstrate proficiency in their chosen area of
concentration. Each student will complete a body of work
in their chosen area, culminating in a Woodlands Art Show
on campus, where they will showcase their most successful pieces. Each student will also complete a research paper and deliver their findings to a faculty panel and student audience campus. Students may also be involved in
the planning and setup of a juried art show through the
LCO Woodlands Artist group.
BUS 108 Introduction to Financial Accounting 3 CR
This course is an introduction to financial accounting. The
course gives students the necessary background to understand the concepts and measurements that underlie
financial statements, develop the skills needed to analyze
financial statements effectively, and gain an understanding
of the choices companies make in reporting the results of
their business activities. Students examine how financial
statements such as the income statements, the balance
sheet, and the statement of cash flows are interrelated.
BUS 109 Introduction to Hospitality 3CR
This class is designed to introduce students to the field of
hospitality and tourism, its growth and development,
industry segments and their distinguishing characteristics,
and trends and concerns. Students will explore career
opportunities, and the employability skills needed to
succeed in specific and hospitality fields.
BUS 110 College Accounting I 3 CR
Students study the accounting cycle for a service business
and a merchandising business. The study encompasses the
complete accounting cycle including worksheets, adjusting
entries, financial statements, closing entries, and reversing
entries. Prerequisite: MTH 108
BUS 125 Introduction to Personal Finance 3 CR
This course introduces personal financial decision-making
concepts including: financial and career planning, spending, saving, borrowing, insurance, consumer product
purchases, and investment and retirement decisions.
BUS 127 Fundamentals of Tribal Management 3 CR
This course covers leadership, motivation, organizational
dynamics, personnel, and budgeting within a Native
American community and sovereign government context.
Studies include federal Indian law and policy, community
and economic development, and culturally specific
management practices.
BUS 128 Native American Governance & Administration
 3 CR
Students study the governance and administration of
contemporary Native Nations. They examine legislative,
executive, and judicial structures, and their functions as
they relate to nation rebuilding. Students study a Nation's
major executive/administrative functions recognizing that
effective administration is a key to self-determination and
sovereignty. The course places contemporary challenges
in a historical context related to Federal Indian policy
and traditional practices. Systems or functions examined
include constitutions, courts, and economic development,
and may include enrollment, community development,
natural resources, cultural resources, cultural preservation, education, protective services, and health and
human services.

BUS 160 Professional Career Development 3 CR
This course is designed to help students recognize the
important role personal qualities play in the work
environment to develop the successful attitudes,
interpersonal skills, and values that are in demand by
employers. Topics include self-esteem, workplace
expectations, interpersonal relationships, motivation,
creative problem solving, teamwork, managing change,
and workplace ethics.
BUS 200 Computerized Accounting 3 CR
This course introduces microcomputer applications related
to accounting systems. Topics include general ledger,
accounts receivable, accounts payable, inventory, payroll,
and correcting, adjusting, and closing entries. Students use
a computer accounting package to solve accounting
problems. Prerequisite: BUS 110
BUS 202 Managerial Accounting 3 CR
Students learn the fundamentals of managerial
accounting. The study includes product and job costing,
activity-based costing, cost-volume-profit analysis, variable
costing, product planning decisions, capital investment
decisions, budgeting, and variance analysis. Prerequisite:
BUS 110
BUS 213 Tribal Supervisory Management 3 CR
This course develops an understanding of management
theories and practical techniques for first-time
supervisors. This course focuses on personal,
inter-personal, technical, and administrative skills required
of successful supervisors. Studies focus on general
supervision issues in a Native American tribal
environment. Prerequisites: BUS 127, BUS 128
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 53
BUS 215 Tribal Management Capstone Project 3 CR
The purpose of the Capstone Project is for the students to
apply theoretical knowledge acquired during the Tribal
Management Certificate to a project involving actual data
or information in a realistic setting. During the project,
students engage in the process of solving a real-world
problem, from collecting and processing actual data/
information to applying suitable and appropriate analytic
methods to the problem. Both the problem statements
for the project assignments and the datasets originate
from real-world domains similar to those that students
might typically encounter within a tribal business or
agency. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all
certificate courses or instructor approval
BUS 220 Microeconomics 3 CR
Students learn the fundamentals of economics. The
course includes supply and demand, business processes,
competition and market power, and the role of
government in the US economy. Students look at
financial markets, technological change, the labor
market, and the distribution of income within the US.
Students analyze economic systems.
Prerequisite: ENG 109
BUS 221 Macroeconomics 3 CR
In this course, students study current economic theories
related to unemployment and inflation. Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) is covered along with other measures of
economic growth. Other areas of study include
macroeconomic equilibrium, governmental fiscal policies,
the function of money, the creation of money, and the
collapse of the US banking system. Prerequisite: ENG 109
BUS 222 College Accounting II 3 CR
This course is a continuation of the terms, concepts, and
procedures of Accounting I. Students learn the proper
accounting for promissory notes, accounts receivable, long
-term assets, partnerships, corporations, and commonly
used methods to analyze financial statements.
Prerequisite: BUS 110
BUS 226 Government & Non-Profit Accounting 3 CR
This course introduces principles and procedures
applicable to governmental and not-for-profit
organizations. Emphasis is on various budgetary
accounting procedures and fund accounting. Students
demonstrate an understanding of the principles involved
and display an analytical problem-solving ability for the
topics covered. Prerequisite: BUS 222
BUS 228 Principles of Marketing 3 CR
This is an introductory course for business students on
marketing systems and managerial techniques used to
market goods, services, and organizations. A basic
understanding of consumer buying behavior and product,
price, promotion, and distribution of a product or service
is provided. The students receive a basic understanding
f target markets, new product development, product
life cycles, packaging and branding, and promotional
techniques. Prerequisite: ENG 109
BUS 231 Business Law 3 CR
This course involves a broad study of many areas of public
and private law that affects business. A general overview
of a judicial system, civil and criminal wrongs, business
relationships and transactions, antitrust law, labor and
employment law, and ethical issues that influence
business are introduced. Prerequisite: ENG 109
BUS 236 Income Tax Accounting 3 CR
This course includes studies in: preparation of income tax
returns from the accounts of an individual, exclusions and
inclusions for gross income, capital gains and losses,
business expenses, and other deductions. Students study
tax regulations applicable to partnerships, corporations,
estates, gifts, and trusts. Prerequisite: BUS 222
BUS 237 Intermediate Accounting I 4 CR
This course is a continuation of the study of accounting
principles with in-depth coverage of theoretical concepts
and financial statements. Topics include generally
accepted accounting principles and extensive analyses
of financial statements. Students demonstrate
competence in the conceptual framework underlying
financial accounting, including the application of financial
standards. Prerequisite: BUS 222
BUS 238 Payroll Tax Accounting 3 CR
This course covers federal and state laws pertaining to
wages, payroll taxes, payroll tax forms, and journal and
general ledger transactions. Emphasis is placed on
computing wages, calculating social security, income and
unemployment taxes, preparing appropriate payroll tax
forms, and journalizing/posting transactions. Students
analyze data, make appropriate computations, complete
forms, and prepare accounting entries using appropriate
technology. Prerequisite: BUS 237
BUS 239 Intermediate Accounting II 4 CR
This course is a continuation of BUS 237. Emphasis is
on special problems which may include leases, bonds,
investments, ratio analyses, present value applications,
accounting changes, and corrections. Students
demonstrate an understanding of the principles involved
and display an analytical problem-solving ability for the
topics covered. Accounting computer problems involving
preparation and completion of spreadsheets are
integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: BUS 237
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 54
BUS 240 Principles of Management 3 CR
This course provides an understanding of functions of
management to include planning, organizing, influencing,
and controlling. The student learns leadership techniques
that include the decision-making process, time
management, delegation, problem solving, stress
management, conflict management, human resource
functions, and strategies for motivation, social obligations,
and interpersonal communications. Prerequisite: ENG 109
BUS 260 Business Communications 3 CR
The ability to communicate effectively is essential to
succeed in today’s business environment. This course is
designed to assist students in achieving academic and career goals through the development of strong
communication skills which includes an effective cover
letter and resume. Students learn principles of business
communications and apply these skills for interacting in
small group settings. Course study includes topics such as
conflict resolution, office politics, and giving and receiving
criticism. Prerequisite: ENG 109 or I. A.
BUS 261 Human Resource Management 3 CR
This course exposes students to the main duties and
functions of the human resources aspect of a company.
Effective programs and procedures are studied in the
following areas: harassment, equal opportunities,
discrimination, hiring, interviewing, job descriptions,
disciplinary actions, job analysis, safety, and evaluations.
Prerequisites: BUS 240, ENG 109
BUS 265 Small Business Management 3 CR
This course is a study of the fundamental concepts in
operating and managing a small business: entrepreneurs,
franchise, strategic planning, business planning, pricing
and profit, production management, inventory control JIT,
and human resource functions. This course examines the
attitudes and behaviors common to successful
entrepreneurs with an emphasis on Native American
Entrepreneurs. Prerequisites: BUS 110, BUS 228, BUS 231,
BUS 240, BUS 260, ENG 109
CPS 101 Computer Applications 3 CR
This course covers the basics of Microsoft Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint. Students wishing to test out of this course
must pass a college placement exam. Placement Criterion:
Accuplacer score or completion of ALP 107
CPS 106 Microsoft Outlook 1 CR
Microsoft Outlook is a utility program designed for those
interested in learning how to manage different categories
of data in an educational environment. Outlook enables
you to control and schedule tasks, dates, e-mails, and
contacts. Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or
completion of CPS 101
CPS 107 Microsoft Word 3 CR
This course develops or improves Microsoft Word skills to
make the most of this industry standard application. It
includes the newest features of Word, document creation,
editing and saving, formatting text and paragraphs, working with tables, columns, and other formatting features,
graphics, WordArt, charts and text flow, and document
templates. Advanced features include mail merge,
macros, document versioning, and proofing tools.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or completion of
CPS 101
CPS 108 Microsoft PowerPoint 2 CR
Microsoft PowerPoint allows the creation of slide
presentations that can easily be shared on the web. This
course includes new features, creating presentations,
formatting and organizing, and working with graphics,
tables, and charts. This course also includes adding multimedia and SmartArt presentations, and integrating with
Microsoft Office file. Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score
or completion of CPS 101
CPS 109 Introduction to Desktop Publishing 2 CR
Desktop publishing combines the personal computer and
graphic design software to create printed documents. This
course focuses on using desktop publishing software to
communicate messages in printed form. The goal of this
course is to produce professional printed materials.
Students learn how to design and publish products such
as newsletters, posters, logos, packaging, signs, books,
flyers, and annual reports. The software taught is Adobe
InDesign, Adobe Illustrator, and Adobe Photoshop.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or completion of
CPS 101
CPS 206 Microsoft Excel 2 CR
Microsoft Excel is the most commonly used spreadsheet
application. Student learn to monitor financial
performance, such as business profit or loss, calculate
payments on large purchases, plan a budget, and stay
organized with checklists. Placement Criterion: Accuplacer
score or completion of CPS 101
CPS 207 Microsoft Access 2 CR
This course includes creating and designing, working with
tables, relationships, keys and constraints, query data,
managing and designing interfaces with forms, creating
basic to advanced reports, and automating tasks with
macros and VBA programming. Placement Criterion:
Accuplacer score or completion of CPS 101
CPS 208 Computer & Business Technologies 3 CR
This course is designed to introduce students to the use
of software applications in business. This instruction
provides them with a solid foundation on which to build
a strong and useful knowledge of information technology.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or completion of
CPS 101
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 55
CUL 101 Food Safety, Sanitation, ServSafe Certifications
 3 CR
To develop an understanding of the basic principles of
sanitation and safety and to be able to apply them in the
foodservice operations. To reinforce personal hygiene
habits and food handling “best practices” that protects the
health of the consumer. The culmination of the course is
the nationally recognized ServSafe Food Handlers
Certification Certificate post successful completion of
exam.
CUL 102 Online Class for the Following: Intro to Cooking
Methods 3 CR
Students will participate in an online discussion forum to
discuss text material and video demonstrations that introduce the hands-on practice for CUL 103, 104 & 105. Tests
and homework will also be online.
CUL 103 Pantry Fundamentals - Soups, Salads, Appetizers
and Small Plates 3 CR
The Pantry is the location in the kitchen where foods are
kept and typically prepared cold. There are a lot of foods
that can be and are prepared this way. They include
smoked and cured meats, vegetables, fruits, salads,
cheeses, pickled foods, condiments, sauces, soups and
sometimes desserts. If you end up catering for a large
event, there's a good chance this station will end up being
in charge of making a large quantity of sandwiches and
other cold platters. This program will also include basic
product identification information, recipe structure, plus
an introduction to common and indigenous cooking
methods.
CUL 104 Protein Selection and Utilization 3 CR
This course provides the students with a hands-on
introduction to the fundamentals of butchery, fish and
seafood identification and fabrication to include wild
game, with an emphasis on regional and local farmers.
Sustainability practices will be explored in depth in this
module.
CUL 105 Culinary Fundamentals 3 CR
This course is designed to give the student fundamental
knowledge, skill, and understanding of the many different
methods for cooking proteins, stocks, sauces, soups, pasta
and grains, meat, poultry, fish, and shellfish.
CUL 106 Summer Internship 3 CR
Using the skills and information taught in the previous
classes, students will have the opportunity to showcase
their newly learned culinary skills in real world situations.
Designed to broaden their education base, paired with
mentors dedicated to their success, this internship opportunity makes the transition from student to sought after
culinary professional seamless. The culinary intern is an
integral part of the kitchen team and will gain hands-on
experience in menu development, recipe formulation,
facilities management, and the day-to-day operations of
an active kitchen. The intern’s time is split between hands
-on kitchen work, procurement of product, and culinaryrelated administrative tasks. They assist the kitchen team
by prepping ingredients, maintaining the kitchen space,
equipment and supplies.
ECE 101 Introduction to Early Childhood 3 CR
This survey course provides an overview of early childhood
care and education including historical and cultural
perspectives, organization, structure, programming,
and evidence-based practices. Professional and evidencebased practices of highly qualified early childhood
educators are outlined with an emphasis on their ability
to enhance development and learning of each child from
birth to age eight. Considerations for diversity of culture,
language, race, socioeconomic status, gender, ethnicity,
and ability are included.
ECE 103 Creative Activities for the Classroom 3 CR
This course is designed for teachers, teacher-aides, and
others involved in the education of children. Collaborative
group discussion and hands-on experiences helps students
plan classroom programs based on the developmental
needs of children. Prerequisite: ECE 101
ECE 104 Professional Field Practice I 2 CR
Emphasis in this course is on developing mentally
appropriate practices, environments, instructional
strategies, methodologies, and materials for early
childhood educators. Teacher candidates build the
competencies necessary to meet Head Start standards
and National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC) guidelines for appropriate practices.
Appropriate field observations and experiences are an
integral part of this course. Prerequisites: ECE 101, ECE
103
ECE 105 Ojibwe Language in Early Childhood Classroom
 3 CR
This course is designed to enhance Ojibwe language skills
of teacher candidates for teaching content areas in Ojibwe
language. Teacher candidates develop, adapt, and revise
content for immersion classrooms. This course focuses on
the development of literacy skills among students for
whom Ojibwe is a second language. Assessment of early
literacy development as well as the roles of families,
centers, schools, and communities are included.
Prerequisite: ECE 101
ECE 203 Health, Nutrition, & Safety in the Early Childhood
Classroom 3 CR
The course is designed to examine the crucial factors of
health, nutrition, and safety as they apply to school
environments of children from birth to age eight.
Emphasis is placed on childhood acute and chronic illness,
social, emotional, and mental health, health routines, 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 56
health appraisals, safety, hygiene, and first aid. Students
learn to examine the impact of family, school, and
community relationships on a child’s health and wellbeing. Information on program planning, classroom
curriculum, current issues, and parent education
concerning health and safety is also discussed.
Prerequisites: ECE 104, ENG 109
ECE 223 Children's Literacy & Literature in the Early
Childhood Classroom 3 CR
High quality children's books are used as a vehicle for
supporting and applying current research on the
acquisition of language and reading. This course provides
an overview of exemplary authors and illustrators of
children's literature from birth to age eight. Students will
become familiar with Caldecott Award winning books and
the artistic techniques used to create these books. Poetry,
multicultural books, and bibliotherapy as applied to early
childhood education are studied. Students learn how to
use children's literature to highlight the literacy elements
of characterization, plot, setting, and theme. They learn
how to teach domains of language (phonology, semantics,
syntax, morphology, and pragmatics) through shared storybook reading. Additionally, students explore the teacher's role in promoting family literacy and participate in a
service-learning project. Prerequisites: ECE 104, ENG 109
ECE 224 Science & Math in the Early Childhood Classroom
 3 CR
This course includes exploring theories behind, and
methodologies for, teaching math and science concepts to
young children from birth through age eight. Students
engage in hands-on activities that they can replicate with
young students and create culturally relevant math and
science activities that promote children’s cognitive
development. The course also provides strategies for
observing and documenting children’s progress in the
content areas of math and science.
Prerequisites: ECE 104, ENG 109
ECE 225 Professional Field Practice II 2 CR
Emphasis in this course is on developmentally appropriate
practices, environments, instructional strategies,
methodologies, and materials for early childhood
educators. Teacher candidates build the competencies
necessary to meet Head Start standards and the National
Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC)
guidelines for appropriate practices. Appropriate field
observations and experiences are an integral part of this
course and are the focus during the course content.
Prerequisites: ECE 104, ENG 109
ECE 260 Child Guidance & Self-Concept 3 CR
This course is a study of the moral development of
children, their self-esteem, and the relationship to child
guidance strategies, both functional assessment and
related prevention for normal to challenging behaviors.
The course includes a broad understanding of the cultural,
moral, social, and familial contexts that children and their
teachers bring to the relationship. Prerequisites: ECE 101,
PSY 242
ECE 270 Early Childhood Program Management 3 CR
This course is a study of the financial, personnel, policy,
and conceptual components of early childhood program
management for public and private settings. It also focuses
on the professional role in the field with the community
and with families. Prerequisites: ECE 101, ENG 109
ECE 291 Early Childhood Field Practicum 6 CR
This course offers structured field experience that gives
the student direct contact with various instructional and
non-educational agencies. This course requires a minimum
of 140 hours of fieldwork and weekly in-class clinical
consultation. If possible, students will be placed in an
Ojibwe/tribal program setting. Prerequisites: Successful
completion of all ECE courses with a minimum 2.5 GPA and
instructor approval
EDC 110 Introduction to Higher Education 3 CR
This course is intended to build skills that will help
students succeed academically. Students should take this
course during their first semester at college. Topics include
self-assessment, study skills, setting goals, time management, library skills, critical thinking, career development,
learning styles, understanding emotional intelligence, and
interpersonal skills.
ENG 104 Creative Writing 3 CR
This course involves basic writing skills including
description and narration with emphasis on methods and
techniques and focuses on incident and memoir writing.
Attention is given to development of critical judgment and
to individual interest. Prerequisite: ENG 108
ENG 108 College Writing, Research & Critical Reading 3CR
This course is a composition course focusing on academic
writing and research, the writing process, and critical
reading. Emphasis is on essays that incorporate readings.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or completion
of ALP 108
ENG 109 Advanced College Writing, Research & Critical
Reading 3 CR
This course is a composition course focusing on research
that presents information, ideas, and arguments. Emphasis
is on the writing process, critical thinking, and critical reading. Prerequisite: ENG 108
ENG 112 Fundamentals of Speech 3 CR
This course is designed as an introduction to the basic
concepts of speech communication with experiences in 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 57
oral expression and listening. Public speaking and critical
listening are emphasized. Other levels of communication
are studied.
ENG 219 Native American Literature 3 CR
This course is an introduction to selected literary works by
Native American authors. Students read contemporary
and traditional oral literatures, including novels, songs and
teaching-stories, Native autobiographies, poetry, essays,
and short stories. We look at issues relevant to the study
of Native American literature, such as Indian identity and
authenticity and oral vs. written narrative. Through
analysis of the texts, students gain a greater insight into
the worldview of Native people.
Prerequisite: ENG 109
HTH 107 Wellness, Healthcare, & Nutrition 3 CR
This course explores the basic concepts of nutrition
science. Human metabolism, nutrition guidelines, and
health maintenance techniques using a traditional
approach, as well as a framework of non-traditional lifestyle principles to complement our search for a healthier
life are discussed. Personal journal keeping incorporates
nutritional choices and physical activity. This course
emphasizes three components: Wellness, Healthcare, and
Nutrition. The first component is an examination of the
mind, body, and spirit relationship. Class discussions and
journal writings focus on the Wellness-Illness Continuum
and the leading health indicators as outlined by Healthy
People 2010 Objectives. Indigenous perspectives of
holistic and environmental health are included. The
second component examines health care system structure,
history, and choices for informed decision making within
the system. Health inequalities, the role of nurses, and
access to health care are discussed at length. An emphasis
is placed on the roles of tribal communities, policies
related to the uninsured & underinsured, and the role of
the Indian Health Service. The third component examines
nutrition in relation to the five dimensions of personal
wellness.
HTH 109 First Aid & CPR 2 CR
Individuals are educated in the proper procedures used
in an emergency situation. Identifying patients, assessing
care needed, providing care, moving and transfer
techniques are discussed. Students are required to
demonstrate competencies in these skills. Healthcare
Providers CPR and Heartsavers First Aid are taught.
Students are awarded an American Heart Association
Healthcare Providers CPR and an American Heart
Association Heartsavers First Aid Card upon completion.
HTH 110 Certified Nursing Assistant 6 CR
This course will prepare the student for entry-level
employment as a nursing assistant in a health care facility
or a client’s home. The student will be able to perform
specific nursing assistant care under the direct supervision
of a licensed Registered Nurse. This course is designed to
meet the requirements of the State of Wisconsin Certified
Nursing Assistance board and will allow student’s the ability to take the Certified Nursing Assistance licensure exam.
HTH 116 Nursing Assistant 3 CR
This course prepares students for entry-level employment
as a nursing assistant in a health care facility or a client’s
home. Students are able to perform specific nursing
assistant care under the direct supervision of a licensed
registered nurse. This course is designed to meet the
requirements of the State of Wisconsin Certified Nursing
Assistance board and allows students the ability to take
the Certified Nursing Assistance licensure exam.
HTH 125 Personal Care Worker 2 CR
This course emphasizes aspects of providing personal and
supportive/rehabilitative healthcare to clients needing
assistance in their home or other care facilities. Basic
knowledge and skills acquired through this course include
clients' rights, communication, rehabilitation, positioning
and transfer skills, infection control, and safety. This is a
40- hour course that combines guided online instruction
with laboratory practice time, a final written exam, and
skills competency testing assessed under the guidance of
a registered nurse.
HTH 130 Medical Terminology 3 CR
This basic medical terminology course provides the framework for understanding medical language and terminology
used by health care professionals. Students analyze
individual medical language such as prefixes, suffixes,
and root words. Students learn the basic components of
medical terminology as it relates to each body system plus
medical terms relating to structure and function of the
body as well as diseases and disorders of the body.
HTH 231 Navigating Healthcare 1 CR
This course emphasizes decision-making in wellness and
healthcare, including advocacy for self and others.
Consideration of values, financial aspects, and effectiveness of choices in promoting wellness are discussed. It
introduces students to health care providers and services.
Prerequisite: ENG 108
HTH 232 Wellness: Food for Fitness 1 CR
This course examines nutrition in relation to the five
dimensions of personal wellness. Consideration is to be
given to cultural beliefs as they influence peoples’
personal food choices. The role of environmental factors
in determining food quality and safety is explored.
Prerequisite: ENG 108
HTH 233 Body, Mind, & Spiritual Wellness 1 CR
This course emphasizes an integrated approach to 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 58
personal wellness, including the body-mind-spirit
relationship. Consideration is given to culture, gender,
and socioeconomic perspectives and how treatment
modalities and health procedures are applied to personal
wellness. Prerequisite: ENG 108
HTH 249 Contemporary Healthcare Issues 3 CR
This course prepares students for working in a variety of
health care areas. Emphasis is on health care law and
ethics. Complex legal, moral, and ethical issues will be
addressed and resolved through discussion. A working
knowledge of laws and ethical issues relevant to the
student’s choice of career are presented by providing
an overview of the laws and ethics relevant to medical
careers. Students relate the cultural component of the
course to current community health concerns.
Prerequisite: ENG 109
HUS 101 Introduction to Human Services 3 CR
This course provides a broad overview of the human
service discipline. Practice skills and intervention strategies
are introduced, and a more in-depth exploration of
intervention strategies are discussed. Coursework
addresses tribal human service systems and the Indian
Child Welfare Law. Students gain a deeper understanding
of the mission, values and goals embraced by the human
service profession.
HUS 102 Professional Field Experience I 2 CR
Students are required to fulfill a total of 250 clinical hours.
This course prepares the student for fieldwork in later
coursework. HUS 202 and HUS 240. Instruction and
practice in skills will occur in the face-to-face seminar.
Discussion of theory and practice is conducted during the
online classroom experience. Prerequisites: HUS 101, HUS
104
HUS 104 Introduction to Human Service Skills and
Practice 3 CR
This course introduces the methodology used in the
human services profession with emphasis on interpersonal communication, interviewing, and development
of basic helping skills. Practice focuses on historical,
intergenerational trauma, and trauma informed care. The
use of attachment theory, trauma informed care, and
reflective supervision in native communities is the focus of
the skills practice. Prerequisite: HUS 101
HUS 105 Group Dynamics 3 CR
This course introduces personal and group dynamics.
During this course, students explore perception,
communication, and collaboration. Students address
individual motivation and team processes such as
development, leadership roles, norms, decision-making
processes, and conflict resolution.
Prerequisites: HUS 101, HUS 104
HUS 201 Family Systems with Cultural Influences 3 CR
This course is an introduction to the study of family
systems theory, dynamics, and family counseling, with
an emphasis on tribal culture. Students develop an
understanding of family systems as they relate to the
human services field. Students increase awareness of the
development of family dynamics within their own family
system and across the changing sociological and cultural
spectrum. Prerequisite: ENG 109
HUS 202 Professional Field Experience II 2 CR
This course provides 80 hours of clinical internship
along with Saturday seminars and online classroom
discussion. Students are provided with advanced training
to improve their skills. Prerequisite: HUS 102
HUS 203 Conflict Resolution & Mediation 3 CR
This course is designed to give students a thorough
perspective of the conflict resolution field and its
application to their individual field of work. This course
provides tools for understanding the nature of conflict and
of the individual and joint decision making processes.
Students devise individual and group strategies that
minimize the consequences of conflict and identify
solutions.
HUS 210 Grant Writing & Program Evaluation 3 CR
This course is designed to familiarize the student with
fundraising strategies, cycles, and ethics. The course
includes information about writing a grant proposal and
the process of grant acceptance. Students develop a
fundraising activity and prepare a community grant
proposal. Prerequisite: ENG 109
HUS 240 Human Services Practicum 6 CR
This course is designed to provide structured field
experience to facilitate integration of human service
knowledge and theory with practical fieldwork application
for a minimum of 160 hours. Students examine and
integrate personal and professional values and understand
their professional roles. If possible, students are placed in
an Ojibwe/tribal agency. Prerequisites: Successful
completion of all HUS courses with a minimum 2.5 GPA
and instructor approval
MTH 108 Math with Business Applications 3 CR
This course integrates algebraic concepts, proportions,
percent, simple interest, compound interest, annuities,
and basic statistics with business/consumer scenarios. It
also applies math concepts to the purchasing/buying and
selling processes. Students apply operations involving
fractions, decimals, and percent to business applications.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 59
MTH 112 Intermediate Math 4 CR
Topics covered include real numbers, linear equations,
graphing linear equations and inequalities, systems of
equations, polynomials, rational expressions and
equations, and quadratic equations and operations
with radicals. Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score
MTH 113 Basic Statistics 4 CR
This course is designed to provide students with an overview of basic applied statistical concepts and methods in
various science disciplines. Topics include measure of
central tendency, probability and probability distributions,
sampling and sampling distribution, hypothesis testing,
statistical testing including 1 & 2 sided t-tests, Analysis of
variance (ANOVA), standard normal distribution, Central
Limit Theorem, and linear regression and best fit lines.
Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score
MTH 115 Algebra with Applications 4 CR
This is a course of algebraic concepts, problem solving
techniques, and applications for students involving
business, natural sciences, social sciences, and Native
American topics and issues. Topics include exponents
and radicals, rates and proportions, linear, quadratic,
exponential and logarithmic functions and their graphs,
matrices, conic sections, and systems of equations and
their graphs. Placement Criterion: Accuplacer score or
completion of MTH 112
MTH 146 College Algebra 4 CR
This course prepares students to take calculus and other
advanced college-level mathematics and science courses.
Topics covered include solving and graphing linear
equations, linear inequalities and functions, quadratic
equations, exponential and logarithmic functions, absolute
value, complex numbers, systems of equations, and
trigonometric functions and calculations. Placement
criterion: Accuplacer score or completion of MTH 112
MTH 230 Calculus I 5 CR
This course is an introduction to differential calculus. It
begins with a review of coordinate geometry, linear and
quadratic functions, power, exponential, and logarithmic
functions with application to mathematical models. Initial
applications of the derivative include linear approximation
and marginal analysis. More advanced differential
techniques include the chain rule, implicit differentiation,
and derivatives of logarithmic and exponential functions.
This course concludes with further applications of the
derivatives in graphical analysis, curve sketching, and
general optimization considerations.
Prerequisite: MTH 146 or instructor approval
MTH 231 Calculus & Analytical Geometry 5 CR
This course is an introduction to differential calculus and
plane analytical geometry. It begins with a review of
advanced algebraic topics including function notation,
composition of functions, exponential and inverse
functions, and parametric expressions. The concept of
limits leads to the basic definition of the derivative with
emphasis on problem solving. The fundamental
differentiation rules are explored including: polynomial,
exponential, trigonometric, and logarithmic functions. The
product, chain and quotient rules are discussed as well as
implicit differentiation. Applications of differentiation
covers maximum and minimum values, curve fitting, as
well as other optimization problems. Prerequisite: MTH
230 or instructor approval
NAS 100 Introduction to Ojibwe Culture 3 CR
This introductory course is designed to give students basic
knowledge about the traditional and contemporary
culture of the Ojibwe people. In this course, students
examine the seasonal living cycle of the Ojibwe including
ceremonies, language, history, arts, economics,
sovereignty, and politics. In addition, students participate
in cultural activities throughout the course in order to gain
hands-on knowledge about Ojibwe culture.
NAS 101 Ojibwemowin I 4 CR
This course is an introduction to the Ojibwe language
through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students
learn basic Ojibwe vocabulary and grammar including
commands, negation, and simple compound sentences.
All four verb-types are examined with an emphasis on VAI
verbs. Traditional Ojibwe culture is integrated throughout
the course as a means of gaining greater comprehension
of the language. The orthography used in this class is commonly known as double-vowel.
NAS 102 Ojibwemowin II 4 CR
Students continue the exploration of Ojibwemowin
through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students
build on and expand their basic Ojibwe vocabulary and
grammar. All four-verb types (VAI, VII, VTA, VTI) are
examined with a particular emphasis on VII and VAI verbs.
Prerequisite: NAS 101
NAS 110 Introduction to Native American History 3 CR
This course examines how Native Americans have
managed to overcome (or adapt to) genocide, warfare,
disease, assimilation, and massive land loss in order to
retain their unique cultural identities. Students study the
oral histories of Indian tribes in order to gain a viewpoint
of Native American history that is often at odds with nonNative historical perspectives. 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 60
NAS 201 Ojibwemowin III 4 CR
Students continue the exploration of Ojibwemowin
through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students
build on and expand their basic Ojibwe vocabulary and
grammar. All four verb-types (VAI, VII, VTA, VTI) are
examined with a special emphasis on VTI verbs.
Prerequisite: NAS 102
NAS 202 Ojibwemowin IV 4 CR
Students continue the exploration of Ojibwemowin
through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students
build on and expand their basic Ojibwe vocabulary and
grammar. All four verb-types (VAI, VII, VTA, VTI) are examined with a special emphasis on VTA verbs.
Prerequisite: NAS 201
NAS 205 Ojibwe History 3 CR
This course examines the historical development of Ojibwe
communities to the present day. Topics include the Ojibwe migration, European contact, changes in traditional
Ojibwe culture, the fur trade, and treaties. Prerequisite:
ENG 109
NAS 212 Wisconsin Native History 3 CR
This course examines the history of Wisconsin's Native
people. Topics include the pre-contact Indians of
Wisconsin, the fur trade, treaties, allotment, Indian
Reorganization Act (IRA), and termination. The course is
divided into three basic chronological eras. The first
segment is the pre-contact period through the first
decades of the Early Republic. The second segment
focuses on the impact of the combined policies of
treaty-making, creating reservations, and allotment in
Wisconsin. The third segment addresses the means by
which Indian people in Wisconsin maintain their sovereign
status in the face of advancing state and federal
authorities. Prerequisite: ENG 109
NAS 213 U.S. Federal Indian Policy & Law 3 CR
This course introduces students to the basic doctrines of
federal Indian policy and law and to the foundations of
tribal sovereignty. The course examines traditional tribal
systems of organization, the history of federal Indian
policy and its origins in European legal tradition, the
history and role of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the
interaction between tribal, federal, and state authorities
on Indian lands. Students analyze major documents of
U.S. Indian policy as well as several Ojibwe treaties.
Prerequisite: ENG 108
NAS 222 Introduction to Tribal Government 3 CR
This course examines the challenge of reservation
governance and involves political, economic, and
Intergovernmental perspectives. The social problems of
Native American communities are addressed with respect
to responsibilities perceived and the legal and traditional
duties of local government. Prerequisite: ENG 108
NAS 230 Ojibwe Literature & Storytelling 3 CR
This course is an introduction to the various forms of
storytelling used by the Ojibwe people. A variety of
different modes of Ojibwe storytelling are examined,
ranging from the oral tradition to present-day literary
works. Aadizookaanag, dibaajimowinan, agindaasowinan,
novels, poetry, and short stories are included to show the
great variety of ways that Ojibwe people express
themselves. Prerequisite: ENG 109
NAS 242 Native American Philosophy 3 CR
This course is an introduction to the philosophical and
spiritual viewpoints of Native people. This course is a
forum for discussion about the varied belief systems of
Native people. Students experience first-hand the
philosophies and practices of a diverse range of Native
Americans. Prerequisite: ENG 109
NSG 105 Nursing Health & Alterations 3 CR
This course focuses on the care of adult clients with
health alterations that require medical and/or surgical
intervention. Emphasis is placed on the care of clients
with alterations in selected body functions. Concepts of
client centered care, cultural sensitivity, informatics, safe
practice, and professionalism are integrated throughout
the course. This course introduces concepts for leadership
and management.
NSG 108 Clinical Care across Lifespan 2 CR
This clinical experience applies nursing concepts and
therapeutic interventions to patients across the lifespan.
It introduces concepts of teaching and learning. Extending
care to include the family is emphasized.
NSG 114 Nursing Fundamentals 2 CR
This course introduces nursing and roles of the nurse, as
well as other professions related to nursing. The course
focuses on basic nursing concepts to provide evidencebased care to diverse patient populations across the
lifespan. Current and historical issues affecting nursing are
explored within the scope of nursing practice. The nursing
process is introduced as a framework for organizing the
care of patients with alterations in cognition, elimination,
comfort, grief/loss, mobility, integument, and fluid/
electrolyte balance.
NSG 115 Nursing Skills 3 CR
This course focuses on development of evidence-based
clinical skills and physical assessment across the lifespan.
Content includes mathematical calculations and
conversions related to clinical skills. Additionally, the 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 61
course includes techniques related to obtaining a health
history and basic physical assessment skills using a body
systems approach.
NSG 116 Introduction to Clinical Practice 2 CR
This introductory clinical course emphasizes basic nursing
skills and application of the nursing process in meeting the
needs of diverse clients across the lifespan. Emphasis is
placed on performing basic nursing skills, the formation of
nurse-client relationships, communication, data collection,
and documentation and medication administration.
NSG 117 Nursing Health Promotions 3 CR
This course focuses on topics related to health promotion
for individuals and families throughout the lifespan. The
course covers nursing care of the developing family, which
includes reproductive issues, pregnancy, labor and
delivery, post-partum, the newborn and the child.
Recognizing the spectrum of healthy families, students
discern patterns associated with adaptive and maladaptive
behaviors applying mental health principles. An emphasis
is placed on teaching and supporting healthy lifestyles
choices for individuals of all ages. Nutrition, exercise,
stress management, empowerment, and risk reduction
practices are highlighted. Study of the family covers
dynamics, functions, discipline styles, and stages of
development.
NSG 118 Introduction to Clinical Care Management 2 CR
This clinical experience applies nursing concepts and
therapeutic nursing interventions to groups of patients
across the lifespan. It also introduces leadership,
management, and team building.
NSG 215 Complex Health Alterations I 3 CR
This course focuses on the care of adult clients with
medical and/or surgical health alterations. Emphasis is
placed on the care of clients with alterations in selected
body functions. Concepts of health promotion, health
education, evidence based practice, and interdisciplinary
collaboration is integrated throughout the course. This
course prepares the learner to provide and evaluate care
for patients across the lifespan.
NSG 216 Behavioral & Community Health 2 CR
This course covers topics related to the delivery of
community and mental health care. Specific health needs
of individuals, families, and groups are addressed across
the lifespan. Attention is given to diverse and at-risk
populations. Mental health concepts concentrate on
adaptive/maladaptive behaviors and specific mental
health disorders. Community resources are examined
in relation to specific types of support offered to diverse
populations.
NSG 217 Intermediate Clinical Practice 3 CR
This intermediate level clinical course develops the
registered nurse (RN) role when working with clients with
complex health care needs. A focus of the course is
developing skills needed for managing multiple clients
across the lifespan. Using the nursing process, students
gain experience in adapting nursing practice to meet the
needs of clients with diverse needs and backgrounds. This
clinical allows the opportunity to develop skills working
with the community and behavioral health needs.
Placement criterion: Acceptance into the nursing program;
Concurrent: NSG 215, NSG 216, NSG 218
NSG 218 Advanced Nursing Skills 1 CR
This course focuses on the development of advanced
clinical skills across the lifespan. Content includes
advanced intravenous skills, blood product administration,
chest tube systems, basic electrocardiogram
interpretation, and nasogastric/feeding tube insertion.
NSG 219 Nursing Pharmacology 2 CR
This course provides the nursing student and the allied
health student with a pathophysiologic approach to
pharmacology. This course addresses the history of
pharmacology, drug class and schedules, administration,
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and
pharmacology math. The nursing process of pharmacology
and the effects of medication on people throughout the
life span are outlined. The effects of pharmacotherapy in
relation to psychosocial, gender, and cultural influences
are discussed. This course identifies each body system and
medications related to maintaining homeostasis.
NSG 220 Complex Health Alterations II 3 CR
This course focuses on advanced concepts of nursing care
as they relate to clients across the lifespan with complex,
multisystem alterations in health. Emphasis is placed on
implementing time management and organizational skills
while managing the care of clients with multiple needs and
collaborating with the interdisciplinary team. Students
focus on management of care for patients with high-risk
perinatal conditions and high-risk newborns.
NSG 221 Management & Professional Concepts 2 CR
This course facilitates the transition of the student to the
role of a professional nurse. Emphasis is placed on
contemporary issues and management concepts, as well
as developing the skills of delegation, conflict
management, and leadership. Legal and ethical issues are
discussed with a focus on personal accountability and
responsibility. Standards of practice and the significance
of functioning according to state regulations and statutes
are analyzed. Emphasis is placed on preparing for practice
as a registered nurse. 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 62
NSG 222 Advanced Clinical Practice 3 CR
This advanced clinical course requires the student to
integrate concepts from all previous courses in the
management of groups of clients facing complex health
alterations. Students have the opportunity to develop
critical thinking skills using the nursing process in making
clinical decisions. Continuity of care through interdisciplinary collaboration is emphasized.
NSG 223 Nursing Clinical Transition 2 CR
This clinical experience integrates all knowledge learned in
the previous courses in transitioning to the role of the
graduate nurse. This clinical experience incorporates an
internship that promotes relatively independent clinical
decisions, delegation, and works collaboratively with
others to achieve client and organizational outcomes.
POL 110 Introduction to American Government 3 CR
This course investigates the constitutional basis,
development, organization, and contemporary roles
of national, state, local, and tribal governments.
PSY 206 Abnormal Psychology 3 CR
This course introduces the many faces of abnormal
psychology. It discusses old and new ideas surrounding
this branch of psychology and offers general information
as to how abnormal psychologists and psychiatrists
identify and treat these types of mental illnesses. This
course introduces a better understanding of the intricacies
of the human mind and the ever-evolving study of
abnormal psychology. Prerequisites: ENG 109, PSY 210
PSY 210 General Psychology 3 CR
This course offers a survey of the scope and methods of
psychology and a cultivation of a scientific attitude toward
behavior. This introductory course facilitates a crosscultural examination and understanding of the study of
human experience through scientific processes and observable evidence provided by thousands of years of
traditions defining behavioral norms. Topics include
psychology as a discipline, research methods, physiological
structures and functions, sensation and perception, state
of consciousness, intelligence, and ways of learning,
memory, cognition, language acquisition, motivation,
emotions, human development, personality, psychological
disorders, and treatments. Prerequisite: ENG 109
PSY 242 Human Growth and Development 3 CR
The study of human development through the life span is
discussed. An interdisciplinary and cross-cultural approach
is employed, emphasizing biological, psychological, and
social factors influencing the process of development
throughout the entire human life span. An introduction to
psychological and behavioral theories and research is
emphasized. This course assists the student in evaluating
and understanding significant aspects of life and applies
the knowledge to everyday professional and personal
settings. Personal improvement and preparation for life's
challenges are major themes of this course.
Prerequisite: ENG 109
SAC 102 Clients Rights & Clients Ethics 2 CR
This course applies federal and state guidelines to case
examples in the areas of confidentiality, clients' rights,
dual relationships, fraudulent behavior, and other ethical
issues.

SAC 103 Interviewing Skills & Record Keeping 3 CR
This course provides an introduction to interviewing
record keeping skills practices in human service’s agencies.
Students learn principles and techniques needed to conduct informational and supportive interviews including
maintaining clinical records, documenting referrals,
staffing, and supervision. Students practice interviewing
skills during class.

SAC 104 AODA Rehabilitation 3 CR
This course focuses on addiction and its physical and
psychological effects on the individual, as well as its effects
on the family and society. Students identify interventions
that may be beneficial regarding treatment of addiction
and assess community resources that may assist with this
type of treatment. Students review signs and symptoms
specific to addictive disorders based on the DSM-VI.
Students assess boundaries and ethical issues commonly
found in assessment, diagnosis and treatment of addictive
disorders.
SAC 110 Introduction to Counseling 3 CR
This course introduces students to a number of counseling
theories, and counseling techniques. The characteristics of
a workable counseling and guidance program and the
techniques used to collect, record, interpret, and use
guidance data are examined. The nature, purpose,
objectives, and approaches to counseling in health,
welfare, social service and rehabilitation agencies are
discussed. The basic concepts, skills and guidelines
associated with effective individual helping relationships
are explored. Interviewing skills are further developed
with an emphasis on the role of the mental health/health
practitioner.
SAC 201 Co-Occurring Disorders 3 CR
This course takes a holistic approach including
epidemiology, etiology and definitions; prevention and
treatment, social and health care institutions and resource
agencies and ethics and legal issues in the helping
profession with a focus on self-attitudes, values and goals.

SAC 202 Substance Abuse and the Family 3 CR
This course examines the role of the family with regard to
addiction. Additionally, the course introduces family 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 63
systems theory and provides an overall foundation for
understanding the dynamics of family interaction from an
AODA perspective. Students evaluate ethical and
boundary issues which are common when working in
substance abuse. Prerequisite: SAC 201
SAC 203 Psychopharmacology 3 CR
Students are introduced to the basic concepts of psychopharmacology, the function of the organs, and systems of
the human body and brain. Prerequisites: SAC 102, SAC
103, SAC 104, SAC 110, SAC 201, SAC 202
SCI 101 General Cell Biology, Genetics & Evolution 4 CR
This general biology course emphasizes cells, inheritance/
genetics, and evolution. It provides an introduction to the
diversity and structure of fungi and plants. Includes a 1
credit lab which meets 2 hours weekly.
SCI 102 General Animal Biology & Ecology 4 CR
This general biology course emphasizes the diversity of
life with a study of bacteria, viruses, and a survey of the
animal kingdom. The course covers anatomy and
physiology of human and animal body systems, animal
behavior and ecology. Includes a 1 credit lab which
meets 2 hours weekly.
SCI 103 General Chemistry I 5 CR
This introductory course involves the study of the chemical
and physical properties of elements, gas laws, chemical
nomenclature, and structure of atoms, chemical bonding,
and solutions. A study lab gives students hands on
experiences while observing chemical and physical
changes resulting from chemical reactions. The course
prepares students for other scientific courses and science
careers. Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours
weekly. Placement criterion: Accuplacer score or
instructor approval.
SCI 104 General Chemistry II 5 CR
This course is a continuation of SCI 103 and develops the
concepts presented in that introductory course. The
course includes: gases and their properties, intermolecular
forces and liquids, the chemistry of solids, solutions, the
chemistry of modern materials, and the control of various
reactions. Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours
weekly. Prerequisite: SCI 103 or instructor approval
SCI 109 Chemistry Concept 1 CR
This course provides a broad overview of chemical
concepts and an introduction to the basis of chemical
reactions and the development of compounds. The
course includes an overview of the periodic table, and the
chemical reactions involved in chemical bonding and the
formation of solutions.
SCI 110 Earth Science 3 CR
This course introduces students to a broad survey of
concepts about our physical environment in the areas
of astronomy, geography, geology and meteorology.
This course takes a lecture approach to understanding
the properties, structure and function of our physical
environment.
SCI 111 Environmental Science 4 CR
This course emphasizes the relationship between humans
and their environment. It specifically addresses aspects
of ecology, populations, natural resources and their
management, pollution, environmental ethics and issues.
Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours weekly.
SCI 112 Introduction to Forestry 3 CR
This course introduces concepts and practices of forestry,
particularly with a regional emphasis. Included are tree
identification, evaluation, and biology, forest ecology, and
the best sustainable management practices for maintaining biodiversity. Issues in forestry will also be addressed.
SCI 116 Introduction to Water Resources 3 CR
This course is designed to introduce students to the field
of water resources. It covers principles for water resources
use and development, water resource quality, and water
resource supply systems. It includes a look at the
hydrologic cycle and provides an introduction to basic
surface and groundwater hydrology. This course includes:
a survey of water resources including lakes, reservoirs,
rivers and streams, groundwater, estuaries and wetlands,
an overview of water supply systems including water
treatment, distribution, reclamation, irrigation and
groundwater systems, and an introduction to water laws,
policy, and management.
SCI 151 General Physics 3 CR
This is a non-calculus general physics course for life
sciences, pre-professional (excluding pre-engineering),
agriculture, and chemistry students. This course covers
mechanics, work and energy, fluids, waves, electricity,
optics and modern physics.
SCI 152 Astronomy 4 CR
This course is designed to introduce students to the
science of astronomy. Students learn about the history of
astronomy, how telescopes work, the laws of nature that
astronomical bodies follow, celestial motion, and different
types of celestial bodies. During lab, students hold class
outside (weather permitting) where they learn about the
night sky and how to use a telescope. Otherwise labs are
held in our regular classroom. Includes a 1 credit lab which
meets 2 hours weekly. 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 64
SCI 161 Introduction to Plant Science 3 CR
Students study the morphology, growth and economic
utilization of plants. The effects of the environmental
factors such as light, temperature and moisture on growth
and yield are examined.
SCI 165 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) 4 CR
This course is an introduction to the principles of
cartography and the use of maps in a variety of
applications. Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
discussions focus on data collection, including the use of
GPS (global positioning systems), data analysis, and
information presentation. Lab work includes the use and
interpretation of maps and the capture and analysis of
data using the PC based GIS ArcGIS. Exercises and
demonstrations cover a variety of GIS applications.
Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours weekly.
Prerequisite: CPS 101 concurrent or instructor approval
SCI 169 Introduction to Horticulture 3 CR
This course will give students the opportunity to learn
about interior, food, and landscape plants; their identification, propagation, culture, and site selection.
SCI 210 Geographic Information Systems Applications
 4 CR
In this capstone course, students learn to evaluate the
needs of a project and determine the resources needed
to successfully complete the project. Students collect
appropriate data, customize the GIS to address specific
project requirements, create accurate and well-designed
mapping products, and apply knowledge gained in the
course to a range of project types undertaken by the
business industry, community, and government. Includes a
1 credit lab which meets 2 hours weekly.
Prerequisites: SCI 165 and concurrent enrollment in SCI
168 or instructor approval
SCI 214 Hydrology 4 CR
This course focuses on the study of water, the global
hydrologic cycle and the processes involved in that cycle.
The occurrence, distribution, movement, physical,
chemical and biological processes that conduct or affect
the movement of all waters of the earth are studied.
Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours weekly.
Prerequisites: ENG 109, MTH 112 and SCI 116 or SCI 118
SCI 218 Fisheries & Wildlife 4 CR
This course is an integrated introduction to principles/
practices of fisheries and wildlife management, including
sampling populations, production of goods and services
while maintaining ecosystem integrity and functions;
contemporary issues. Students discuss positive and
negative elements of fisheries and wildlife management.
Biology and identification of fisheries, aquaculture and
wildlife species are emphasized with a focus on fish,
mollusks, crustaceans and mammals. Culture/growth
methods, sites and economics of hatcheries, aquaculture/
aquaponics, and game farms are discussed. The students
observe local management practices and discuss the
impacts they have on the community. Includes a 1 credit
lab which meets 2 hours weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109
SCI 230 Human Anatomy & Physiology I 4 CR
This course enables the student to develop a working
knowledge of the structure and functions of the human
body at the cellular, organ and system levels. The course
includes a laboratory that gives students some practical
and clinical experience in addition to reinforcing
anatomical and physiological facts. Topics include:
chemistry basics; cells; cellular metabolism; organization
of body; tissues; skin; skeletal system; muscular system;
joints; nervous system; water; electrolyte and acid/base
balance. Includes a 1 credit lab which meets 2 hours
weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109, SCI 101 or SCI 102
SCI 231 Human Anatomy & Physiology II 4 CR
This course enables the student to develop a working
knowledge of the structure and function of the human
body at the cellular, organ and systems level. The course
includes a laboratory that gives students some practical
and clinical experience in addition to re-enforcing
anatomical and physiological facts. Topics include
endocrine system, circulatory metabolism, respiratory
system, urinary system, reproductive system, growth and
development, genetics. Includes a 1 credit lab which
meets 2 hours weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109, SCI 230
SCI 232 Microbiology 4 CR
This course emphasizes fundamentals of microbiology,
through lecture and laboratory skills. Topics include:
history, morphology, and physiology, nutritional growth
and metabolism, immunology, the techniques used in
the identification of microorganisms, and the microbial
diseases of body systems. The impact on the spread of
diseases and type of control are demonstrated. Common
causes and sources of infection are demonstrated,
along with analysis of clinical applications and recent
chemotherapy—antibiotics and immunology discoveries
known to combat the powerful microbes. The students
are exposed to a diversity component which focuses
on healthcare disparities across different cultural,
socio-economic, gender, age, and disability backgrounds
that apply to infectious disease. Includes a 1 credit lab
which meets 2 hours weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109, SCI
230
SCI 240 Fall Ethnobotany 4 CR
This course offers a study of local plants and their
environment. This study includes identification, philosophy 
LAC COURTE OREILLES OJIBWA COMMUNITY COLLEGE CATALOG 2018-2019 65
and botanical principles of plants. The identification
involves learning the common/local name of plants,
scientific name, and Ojibwe name. The philosophy
includes general use of plants with an emphasis on
awareness and respect of plants, which is important to
the Ojibwe tradition. Study includes the physical/
physiological makeup of plants and their habitat or
community where they are found. Includes a 1 credit
lab which meets 2 hours weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109
SCI 241 Spring Ethnobotany 4 CR
This course offers a study of local plants and their
environment. This study includes identification,
philosophy, and botanical principles of plants. The
identification involves learning the common/local
name of plants, scientific name, and Ojibwe name.
The philosophy includes general use of plants with an
emphasis on awareness and respect of plants, which
is important to the Ojibwe tradition. Study includes the
physical/physiological makeup of plants and their habitat
or community where they are found. Includes a 1 credit
lab which meets 2 hours weekly. Prerequisite: ENG 109
SCI 293 Field Methods in Natural Resources 2 CR
This course incorporates identification of different flora
and fauna, survey techniques, as well as research design
methods and implementation of natural science concepts
into the experiential learning atmosphere of an internship
in the field of Natural Resources. The students are
required to sign a contract agreement before internship
placement. Prerequisites: ENG 109, CPS 101 and SCI 101
or SCI 102 or SCI 111
SCI 298 Self-Directed Studies 2 CR
An individually designed project encompassing the realm
and scope of a topic to which the student identifies.
The instructor determines the credits and work to be
compiled. Prerequisite: Consent of the academic dean
and instructor. Prerequisite: ENG 109
SOC 111 Introduction to Sociology 3 CR
An introduction to the basic concepts and methods of
sociology, the basic structure of social life, culture, types
of group interaction, social institutions, stratification,
power relationships, and social problems.
SOC 114 Sociology of Food and Culture 3CR
Where does our food come from? How does the study of
food help us understand what we call “society”, “culture”
and “identity”? This course explores connections between
what we eat and who we are through the study of how
personal identities and social groups are formed via food
production, preparation, and consumption. The course
examines the social context shaping the literal and symbolic production of food. We will discuss the cultural
meanings attached to food, the institutional and industrial
creation of food, its preparation, and rituals of eating. We
will work towards a better understanding of how food is
related to identity, ethnicity, religion, politics, economics,
nationalism, gender, health and environment.
SOC 205 Sociology of Race, Diversity, & Ethnicity in the
United States 3 CR
Investigation into the social dynamics shaping racial and
ethnic minority experiences in America. The causes and
consequences of prejudice, racism and discrimination are
studied. Students examine the minority status of African
Americans, Native Americans, Hispanic Americans and
Asian Americans in contrast to European ancestry groups.
Students analyze institutional racism and contemporary
issues involving minority groups. Additional topics relating
to diversity include ageism, sexism, gender differences, the
disabled and sexual orientation. Prerequisite: ENG 109
